Figure 1: FiGAR induces temporal abstractions in learnt policies. The arrows indicate the actionexecuted between the frames and the numbers depict the number of time steps for which the actionwas repeated. The thunder bolt corresponds to the firing action. An arrow alongside a thunderboltcorresponds to the action (arrow+fire). In the figure (a), the agent learns to execute down operation(which is equivalent to a no-op in this particular state, in this game) until a traveling car passes byand then executes temporally elongated actions to complete the task, skillfully avoiding the red carin the 7th frame. In figure (b) the agent catches a glimpse of a pink opponent towards bottom rightin the 2nd frame and executes temporally elongated actions to intercept and kill it (in the 6th frame).
Figure 2: Percentage Improvement of FiGAR-A3C over A3C for Atari 2600In the next three sub-sections, we experiment with the simplest possible action repetition setW = {1,2,…，| W|}. Inthe fourth sub-section, We understand the effects that changing the actionrepetition set W has on the policies learnt.
Figure 3: Evaluation of Action Repetition Control for Atari 2600. See Appendix B (Table 7) for anexpanded version of figure.
Figure 4: Training progress plotted versus time for Atari 2600APPENDIX B:	ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS FOR ATARI 2600These additional experiments are geared at understanding the repercussions of the evaluation strat-egy chosen by us.
Figure 5: Average performance plotted against the probability with which we sample from finalpolicy distribution for Atari 2600. Points toward the left side of a sub-graph depict average perfor-mance for a greedy version of a policy and those towards the right side depict performance for thestochastic version of the policy.
Figure 6: Comparison of FiGAR-A3C variants to the A3C baseline for 2 games: Sea Quest andAsterix10000800025000It is clear from Figure 6 that even though FiGAR A3C needs to explore in 2 separate action-spaces(those of primitive actions and the action repetitions), the training progress is not slowed down as aresult of this exploration, for any FiGAR variant.
Figure 7: Comparison of FiGAR-A3C variants to the A3C baseline for 3 games: Sea Quest, SpaceInvaders and Asterix. Game scores have been scaled down by 1000 and rounded to 1 decimal place.
