Figure 1: Influence of the feature maps on texture synthesis performance. (Top) Samples synthesizedfrom several single-layer models with 363 feature maps (see sec. 2) for three different textures(rows). Reference textures are shown in the first column. (Bottom) Samples synthesized fromseveral single-layer models with 3267 feature maps (see sec. 2) for three different textures (rows).
Figure 2: Influence of the scale and the non-linearity on texture synthesis performance. (1st column)Samples from the random multi-scale model for comparison (same as in Fig. 1). (2nd - 7th colum)Samples from the random single-scale model with different spatial filter sizes. (Last column) Samplesfrom the random multi-scale model without ReLU nonlinearity.
Figure 3: Each row shows the reference texture (left, gray background) and three samples that weresynthesized from different (random) initial images using our multi-scale model. Most importantly,the multi-scale model generates samples that are perceptually different. All three textures are takenfrom Portilla & Simoncelli (2000).
Figure 4: Each row shows the reference texture (left, gray background) and three samples that weresynthesized from different (random) initial images using three different models: single-layer networkwith 1024 feature maps and random 11x11 filters; multi-scale single layer network with filters ofsizes f × f, where f = {3, 5, 7, 11, 15, 23, 37, 55} and 128 feature maps correspond to filters of eachsize; and the VGG-based model (Gatys et al., 2015a). Numbers above figures show the values of thenormalized VGG-loss (7) for corresponding textures.
Figure 5: Initializing VGG-synthesis with a sample from the random multi-scale model. The firstcolumn shows the original textures, the second and third columns show samples from the standardVGG-based synthesis (random initialization) (Gatys et al., 2015a) and the random multi-scale model.
Figure 6: Similarity measures between textures computed using the structural similarity index onthe pixels (SSIM, left column) and normalized euclidean distances in the feature spaces of VGG(second column) and two shallow texture models (third and fourth column). Ten random patcheswere extracted from each of ten different textures (examples of patches are shown in top row). Thematrix element (i, j) of each similarity matrix corresponds to the median distance between patchesfrom textures i and j. The values for all but the SSIM matrix are shown on a log-scale.
Figure 7: Examples of inpainted textures for the VGG model (Gatys et al., 2015a, , two top rows) andrandom multi-scale model (two bottom rows). Textures were inpainted starting from three differentinitial conditions (10 %, 15 %, 20 % corresponding to the width of the frame used for initialization),and for each initial condition the texture was inpainted either by matching the Gram matrix of thepatch used for initializing the frame (regular sample) or by matching the Gram matrix estimated overmany (500) randomly extracted patches from the texture (estimate sample).
