Figure 1: (Column a) Average normalized geodesic length and (Column b) average number of beadsversus loss. (1) A quadratic regression task. (2) A cubic regression task. (3) A convnet for MNIST.
Figure 2: A cartoon of the algorithm. a) : The initial two models with approximately the sameloss, Lo. b) : The interpolated loss curve, in red, and its global maximum, occuring at t = t*. c):The interpolated model Θ(θi, θj,t*) is added and labeled θi,j. d) : Stochastic gradient descent isperformed on the interpolated model until its loss is below aLo. e) : New interpolated loss curvesare calculated between the models, pairwise on a chain. f) : As in step c), a new model is insertedat the maxima of the interpolated loss curve between θi and θ%,j. g) : As in step d), gradient descentis performed until the model has low enough loss.
Figure 3: Snapshots of Dynamic String Sampling in action for the quadratic regression task. Thestring’s coordinates are its projections onto the three most important principal axes of the fullyconverged string. (Top Left) One step into the algorithm, note the high loss between all of thevertices of the path. (Top Right) An intermediate step of the algorithm. Portions of the string haveconverged, but there are still regions with high interpolated loss. (Bottom Left) Near the end of thealgorithm. Almost the entire string has converged to low loss. (Bottom Right) The algorithm hasfinished. A continuous path between the models has been found with low loss.
Figure 4: These three figures are projections of the components of the 12-dimensional weight ma-trices which comprise the models on the string produced by the DSS algorithm. The axes are theprincipal components of the weight matrices, and the colors indicate test error for the model. Formore details on the figure generation, see Appendix D. (Left) The string of models after 1 step. Notethe high error at all points except the middle and the endpoints. (Middle) An intermediate stageof the algorithm. Part of the string has converged, but a persistent high-error segment still exists.
