Figure 1: Comparing the axiomatic and learned invariants of a curve.
Figure 2: Siamese Configurationat each evolved time t is then recorded as an invariant. For example, {κ(s, t), κs (s, t), κss (s, t)...}would be the Euclidean-invariant representations at scale t.
Figure 3:	Network Architecturetransformed version (positive) of the curve or an unrelated curve (negative). By using two identicalcopies of the same network sharing weights to process these two curves we are able to extract geo-metric invariance by using a loss function to require that the two arms of the Siamese configurationmust produce values that are minimally different for curves which are related by Euclidean transfor-mations representing positive examples and maximally different for carefully constructed negativeexamples. To fully enable training of our network we build a large dataset comprising of positiveand negative examples of the relevant transformations from a database of curves. We choose tominimize the contrastive loss between the two outputs of the Siamese network as this directs thenetwork architecture to model a function over the curve which is invariant to the transformation.
Figure 4:	Contours extracted from the MPEG7 Database and the error plot for training.
Figure 5: Curve evolution and the corre-sponding curvature profile.
Figure 6: Experiments with multi-scale representations. Each signature is the output of a networktrained on a dataset with training examples formed as per the rows of Table 1. Index1 indicates lowand 5 indicates a higher level of abstraction.
Figure 7: Stability of different signatures in varying levels noise and Euclidean transformations. Thecorrespondence for the shape and the signature is the color. All signatures are normalized.
Figure 8: 5 shape contours of 6 different categories and the shape retrieval results for this set fordifferent noise levels.
Figure 9: Testing robustness of signatures to different sampling conditions. The signatures areevaluated at the fixed red points on each contour and the density and distribution of the blue pointsalong the curve is varied from 70% to 5% of the total number of points of a high resolution curve.
Figure 10: (a) Standard 1D Gaussian filters and its derivatives used for curvature and curvature scalespace calculations. (b) Some of the filters from the first layer of the network proposed in this paper.
