Figure 1: Left: basic hierarchical model, where the plate encodes the fact that the context variablec is shared across each item in a given dataset. Center: full neural statistician model with threelatent layers z1 , z2 , z3 . Each collection of incoming edges to a node is implemented as a neuralnetwork, the input of which is the concatenation of the edges’ sources, the output of which is aparameterization of a distribution over the random variable represented by that node. Right: Thestatistic network, which combines the data via an exchangeable statistic layer.
Figure 2: Three different views of the same data. Each point is the mean of the approximate posteriorover the context q(c|D; φ) where c ∈ R3. Each point is a summary statistic for a single dataset with200 samples. Top plot shows points colored by distribution family, left plot colored by the mean andright plot colored by the variance. The plots have been rotated to illustrative angles.
Figure 3: An image fromMNIST on the left, transformedto a set of 50 (x, y) coordinates,shown as a scatter plot on theright.
Figure 4: Conditioned samples from spatial MNIST data. Blue and red digits are the input sets,black digits above correspond to samples given the input. Red points correspond to a 6-samplesummary of the datasetFigure 5: Few-shot learning Left: Few-shot learning from OMNIGLOT to MNIST. Left rows areinput sets, right rows are samples given the inputs. Right: Few-shot learning from with OMNIGLOTdata to unseen classes. Left rows are input sets, right rows are samples given the inputs. Black-whiteinversion is applied for ease of viewing.
Figure 5: Few-shot learning Left: Few-shot learning from OMNIGLOT to MNIST. Left rows areinput sets, right rows are samples given the inputs. Right: Few-shot learning from with OMNIGLOTdata to unseen classes. Left rows are input sets, right rows are samples given the inputs. Black-whiteinversion is applied for ease of viewing.
Figure 6: Few-shot learning for face data. Samples are from model trained on Youtube FacesDatabase. Left: Each row shows an input set of size 5. Center: Each row shows 5 samples from themodel corresponding to the input set on the left. Right: Imagined new faces generated by samplingcontexts from the prior. Each row consists of 5 samples from the model given a particular sampledcontext.
