Figure 1: Network pruning asa backward filter.
Figure 2: Global statistics of oracle ranking,shown by layer for Birds-200 transfer learning.
Figure 3: Pruning without fine-tuning usingoracle ranking for Birds-200 transfer learning.
Figure 4: Pruning of feature maps in VGG-16 fine-tuned on the Birds-200 dataset.
Figure 5: Pruning of feature maps in AlexNet on fine-tuned on Flowers-102.
Figure 6: Varying the number of minibatchupdates between pruning iterations withAlexNet/Flowers-102 and the Taylor criterion.
Figure 7: Pruning of a recurrent 3D-CNN fordynamic hand gesture recognition(Molchanov et al., 2016).
Figure 8: Pruning of AlexNet on Imagenet with varying number of updates between pruning iterations.
Figure 9: Pruning of the VGG-16 network onImageNet, with additional following fine-tuning at11.5 and8 GFLOPs.
Figure 10: Statistics of feature map ranking by raw criteria values (top) and by criteria values after `2normalization (bottom).
Figure 11: Change in training loss as a function of the removal of a single feature map from theVGG-16 network after fine-tuning on Birds-200. Results are plotted for two convolutional layers w.r.t.
Figure 12: Comparison of our iterative pruning with pruning by regularizationTable 3 contains a layer-by-layer listing of Spearman’s rank correlation of several criteria with theranking of oracle-abs. In this more detailed comparison, we see the Taylor criterion shows highercorrelation for all individual layers. For several methods including Taylor, the worst correlationsare observed for the middle of the network, layers 5-10. We also evaluate several techniques fornormalization of the raw criteria values for comparison across layers. The table shows the bestperformance is obtained by `2 normalization, hence we select it for our method.
Figure 13: Spearman rank correlation for linear combination of criteria. The per layer metric is used.
Figure 14: Correlation of Taylor criterion with gradient and activation (after layer-wise `2 normaliza-tion) for all neurons (a-b) and bottom 10% of neurons (c-d) for unpruned VGG after fine-tuning onBirds-200.
