Figure 1: (Top) ReSNet uSed for claSSification. NumberS on top of arrowS denote the number offeature mapS and numberS below arrowS denote Spatial reSolutionS. Conv denoteS a convolutionallayer, Res*5 denotes a sequence of 5 residual blocks as introduced by He et al. (2016), GAP denotesa global-average pooling layer and Dens a fully-connected layer. Spatial reSolutionS are decreaSedby strided convolution and the number of feature maps on the residual’s shortcut is increased by1x1 convolutions. All convolutional layers have 3x3 receptive fields and are followed by batchnormalization and rectified linear units. (Bottom) Topology of detector network, which is attached toone of the AD(i) positions. MP denotes max-pooling and is optional: for AD(3), the second poolinglayer is skipped, and for AD(4), both pooling layers are skipped.
Figure 2: (Left) Illustration of detectability of different adversaries and values for ε on CIFAR10.
Figure 3: Transferability on CIFAR10 of detector trained for adversary with maximal distortion fitwhen tested on the same adversary with distortion test . Different plots show different adversaries.
Figure 4: Transferability on CIFAR10 of detector trained for one adversary when tested on otheradversaries. The maximal distortion of the adversary (when applicable) has been chosen minimallysuch that the predictive accuracy of the classifier is below 30%. Numbers correspond to the accuracyof the detector on unseen test data.
Figure 5: Illustration of detectability versus classification accuracy of a dynamic adversary fordifferent values of σ against a static and dynamic detector. The parameter σ has been chosen asσ ∈ {0.0, 0.1, . . . , 1.0}, with smaller values of σ corresponding to lower predictive accuracy, i.e.,being further on the left.
Figure 6:	Illustration of detectability of different adversaries and values for ε on 10-class ImageNet.
Figure 7:	Transferability on 10-class ImageNet of detector trained for adversary with maximaldistortion fit when tested on the same adversary with distortion test . Different plots show differentadversaries. Numbers correspond to the accuracy of the detector on unseen test data.
Figure 8: Transferability on 10-class ImageNet of detector trained for one adversary when tested onother adversaries. The maximal distortion of the '∞ -based Iterative adversary has been chosen asε = 2 and as ε = 800 for the '2-based adversary. Numbers correspond to the accuracy of detector onunseen test data.
