Figure 2: Samples generated from various models by performing gradient ascent on random inputs(see § -5.1.2). While none of the generated samples are realistic, samples obtained from score-matchedand gradient-norm regularized models are smoother and less noisy.
Figure 1: Plots of density ratios representinglocal density profiles across varying levels ofnoise added to the input (lower is better). Weobserve that score-matched model is robustWe also propose to qualitatively measure the samplequality using the GAN-test approach (Shmelkov et al.,2018). This test proposes to measure the discrimina-tive accuracy of generated samples via an indepen-dently trained discriminative model. In contrast withmore popular metrics such as the inception-score, thiscaptures sample quality rather than diversity, whichis what we are interested in. We show the results intable 1, which confirms the qualitative trend seen insamples above. Surprisingly, we find that gradient-norm regularized models perform better than score-matched models. This implies that such models areable to implicitly perform density modelling withoutbeing explicitly trained to do so. We leave furtherinvestigation of this phenomenon to future work.
Figure 3: Discriminative pixel perturbation results (higher is better) on the CIFAR100 dataset (see§ 5.2.1). We see that score-matched and gradient-norm regularized models best explain modelbehaviour in both cases, while the anti-score-matched model performs the worst. This agrees with thehypothesis (stated in § 3) that alignment of implicit density models improves gradient explanationsand vice versa.
Figure 4: Visualization of input-gradients of different models. We observe that gradients of score-matched and gradient-norm regularized models are more perceptually aligned than the others, withthe gradients of the anti-score-matched model being the noisiest. This qualitatively verifies thehypothesis stated in § 3.
Figure 5: Discriminative pixel perturbation results (higher is better) on the CIFAR10 dataset (see§ 5.2.1). We see that score-matched and gradient-norm regularized models best explain modelbehaviour in both cases, while the anti-score-matched model performs the worst. This agrees with thehypothesis (stated in § 3) that alignment of implicit density models improves gradient explanationsand vice versa.
Figure 6: Visualization of input-gradients of different models. We observe that gradients of score-matched and gradient-norm regularized models are more perceptually aligned than the others, withthe gradients of the anti-score-matched model being the noisiest. This qualitatively verifies thehypothesis stated in § 3.
