Figure 1: Each player i’s utility function depends on its parents represented here by a directed acyclicgraph. Each parent must broadcast its vector, “location”, down the hierarchy in a fixed order.
Figure 2: EigenGame guides eachvi along the unit-sphere from T to +in parallel; M = diag([3,2,1]).
Figure 3: (a) The longest streak of consecutive vectors with angular error less than ∏ radians isplotted versus algorithm iterations for a matrix M ∈ R50×50 with a spectrum decaying from 1000to 1 linearly and exponentially. Average runtimes are reported in milliseconds next to the methodnames4 5. We omit Krasulina’s as it is only designed to find the top-k subspace. Both EigenGamevariants and GHA achieve similar asymptotes on the linear spectrum. (b) Longest streak and subspacedistance on MNIST with average runtimes reported in seconds. (a,b) Learning rates were chosen from{10-3, . . . , 10-6} on 10 held out runs. Solid lines denote results with the best performing learningrate. Dotted and dashed lines denote results using the best learning rate × 10 and 0.1. All plots showmeans over 10 trials. Shading highlights ± standard error of the mean for the best learning rates.
Figure 4: (a) Repeats analysis of Figure 3a but for a lower angular tolerance of 32. (b) Repeatsanalysis of Figure 3a with an angular tolerance of 8 as before, but with eigenvalues 10 - 19 of theordered spectrum overwritten with λ10 of the original spectrum. We compute angular error for theeigenvectors on either side of this “bubble" to show that EigenGame finds these eigenvectors despiterepeated eigenvalues in the spectrum; note 40/50 is optimal in this experiment.
Figure 5: (a) Top-8 principal components of the activations of a RESNET-200 on IMAGENET orderedblock-wise by network topology (dimension of each block on the right y-axis). Block 1 is closest toinput and Block 5 is the output of the network. Color coding is based on relative variance betweenblocks across the top-8 PCs from blue (low) to red (high). (b) Block 1 mean activation maps of thetop-32 principal components of RESNET-200 on IMAGENET computed with EigenGame.
