Figure 1: An overview of neural module networks (NMNs). A question q is read by the programgenerator to produce a program Z. The execution engine assembles neural modules according tothe layout Z and feeds the input image X into the assembled module network. A classifier takes theoutput of the top-level module to produce an answer y for the given (q, x) pair.
Figure 2: Phases of IL for emergent module layouts. Solid arrows indicate forward pass throughthe model, and dashed lines indicate the cross-entropy loss between predictions and targets. Af-ter proceeding through phases (a)-(d), the new program generator and execution engine begin aninteracting phase (a) of a new generation.
Figure 3: SHAPES-SyGeT answer accuracies of models with varying number of ground-truth pro-grams, with and without IL. All models use a Tensor-FiLM-NMN execution engine.
Figure 4: Learning curves of models with and without IL on SHAPES-SyGeT, using 20 ground-truth programs. The IL curves use a global gradient step counter across all phases. The dips in theIL training curves indicate the beginning of new generations.
Figure 5: Learning curves of models trained with and without IL on CLEVR using 100 ground-truthprograms. The IL curves use a global gradient step counter across all phases. The dips in the ILtraining curves indicate the beginning of new generations.
Figure 6: Validation curves of models trained with and without IL on CLEVR using 100 ground-truth programs.
Figure 7: Program accuracies at various levels of granularity of models trained on GQA using 4000ground-truth programs. Here, (e) uses the strictest notion of program accuracy. The models withany form of IL use a global gradient step counter across all phases. The dips in the curves indicatethe beginning of new generations.
Figure 8: Training and validation curves of models trained on GQA using 4000 ground-truth pro-grams. The models with any form of IL use a global gradient step counter across all phases. Thedips in the training curves indicate the beginning of new generations.
