Table 1: Test accuracy after (target rounds) and number of rounds to reach (target test accu-racy) on various datasets. Algorithms in conjunction with FedProx are compared separately (bot-tom). MAFL-based algorithms are marked in bold.
Table 2: Test accuracy after 50 rounds on Shakespeare dataset.
Table 3: Test accuracy on CIFAR10, under varyingnumber of clients (N). Number of samples per clientis kept constant.
Table 4: Test accuracy on CIFAR10, under varyingnumber of local data per client. Number of clients(N) is kept constant. Number of data is indicated inpercentage of the case where all 50,000 data are used.
Table 5: Test accuracy on CIFAR10, under varying mixup ratio λ.
Table 6: Test accuracy after 500 rounds onCIFAR10, under varying number of classesper client.
Table 7: Test accuracy after 500 rounds on CI-FAR10, under varying number of clients trainedper communication round.
Table 8: Hyperparameter settings for each dataset.
Table 9: Test accuracy after (target rounds) and number of rounds to reach (target test accuracy) onvarious datasets. We compare FedMix with baseline Mixup algorithms.
Table 10: Test accuracy after 500 rounds on CI-FAR10, under varying local epochs (E).
Table 11: Test accuracy on FedMix with introduc- Table 12: Test accuracy on FEMNIST, N =tion of cut-off threshold, tested on a number of 300 under various Mixup ratio λ.
Table 13: Mean and standard variation of local test accuracy of FedMix on FEM-NIST, tested on clients with varying local data size, under varying λ.
Table 14: Performance of FedMix with Gaussiannoise. σ refers to standard deviation of Gaussiannoise.
Table 15: Test accuracy on CIFAR10 varyingm, number of entries in Xg , Yg to be furtheraveraged.
Table 16: Test accuracy on CIFAR10, withclass/client = 2, under different split meth-ods. Mk = 0.5nk for both splits.
Table 17: Test accuracy of NaiveMix on CI-FAR10, under varying Mixup ratio λ.
Table 18: Test accuracy on CIFAR10 under label-skewed heterogeneous envi-ronment. We used Dirichlet distribution for uneven label distribution.
