Table 1: Quantitative comparison on the 25Gaussiansdataset. Higher scores are better.
Table 2: Comparison of different variants of DGf low with DOT on the CIFAR10 and STL10 datasets. ForSN-DCGAN, (hi) denotes the hinge loss and (ns) denotes the non-saturating loss. Lower scores are better.
Table 3: Inception scores of different generative models, DRS, MH-GAN, DDLS, and DGf low on the CI-FAR10 dataset. Higher scores are better.
Table 4: Comparison of different variants of DGf low applied to MMDGAN, OCFGAN-GP, VAE, and Glowmodels. Lower scores are better. Results have been averaged over 5 random runs with the standard deviation inparentheses.
Table 5: Results of DGf low on a character-level GAN language model.
Table 6: Network architectures used for MMDGAN and VAE models.
Table 7: f -divergences and their derivatives.
Table 8: Runtime comparison of DOT, DDLS, and DGflow(KL) on the 25Gaussians dataset. The runtime isaveraged over 100 runs with standard deviation reported in parentheses.
Table 9: Runtime of DGf low(KL) for models that do not require density-ratio correction on a single GeForceRTX 2080 Ti GPU. The runtime is averaged over 100 runs with standard deviation reported in parentheses.
Table 10: Runtime of DGf low(KL) for models that require density-ratio correction on a single GeForce RTX2080 Ti GPU. The runtime is averaged over 100 runs With standard deviation reported in parentheses.
Table 11: Comparison of different variants of DGf loW With DOT on the CIFAR10 and STL10 datasets. Higherscores are better.
Table 12: Comparison of different variants of DGf loW applied to MMDGAN, OCFGAN-GP, VAE, and GloWmodels. Higher scores are better.
Table 13: Comparison of different variants of DGf loW Without diffusion (i.e., γ = 0) on the CIFAR10 andSTL10 datasets. LoWer scores are better.
Table 14: Comparison of DDLS with DGf low (with and without diffusion) on the CIFAR10 dataset. Higherscores are better.
Table 15: Comparison of different variants of DGf loW applied to MMDGAN, OCFGAN-GP, and VAE modelsWithout density-ratio correction. LoWer scores are better.
