Table 1: Fraction of solved target structures for MCTS-RNA, antaRNA, RL-LS, RNAInverse, LEARNA,Meta-LEARNA, and Meta-LEARNA-Adapt on the two benchmarks from the literature (Eterna100 andRfam-Taneda), as well as on our newly introduced benchmark (Rfam-Learn-Test). A target structurecounts as solved if a solution was found in any of the evaluation runs.
Table 2: Overview on the three benchmarks Eterna100 (Anderson-Lee et al., 2016), Rfam-Taneda(Taneda, 2011) and Rfam-Learn we used for our experiments. The table displays the timeout, thenumber of evaluations for each target structure, the number of sequences and the range of sequencelengths for the corresponding benchmark.
Table 3: Search space for the agent’s architecture and the hyperparameters used for LEARNA.
Table 4: Modified hyperparameters in the search space used for optimizing Meta-LEARNA comparedto Table 3. We adapted these ranges slightly based on preliminary experiments. We hypothesize thatthe longer training time and the parallel training require smaller learning rates and larger regulariza-tion.
Table 5: The selected configurations for each scenario.
Table 6: Comparison of all methods on Eterna100. Results list the number of solved target structuresin at least 1, 2, 3, 4, or all of the evaluation runs in percent.
Table 7: Comparison of all methods on Rfam-Taneda. Results list the number of solved targetstructures in at least 1, 5, 10, 25, or all of the evaluation runs in percent.
Table 8: Comparison of all methods on Rfam-Learn-Test. Results list the number of solved targetstructures in at least 1, 2, 3, 4, or all of the evaluation runs in percent.
Table 9: Comparison of all methods on Eterna100. Results list the number of solved target structuresat different time points in percent.
Table 10: Comparison of all methods on Rfam-Taneda. Results list the number of solved targetstructures at different time points in percent.
Table 11: Comparison of all methods on Rfam-Learn-Test. Results list the number of solved targetstructures at different time points in percent.
Table 12: Results for 5 independent attempts on the first half of the 100 target structures of the Rfam-Learn-Test benchmark. We abbreviate Meta-LEARNA with M-LEARNA and Meta-LEARNA-Adaptwith M-LEARNA-A.
Table 13: Results for 5 independent attempts on the second half of the 100 target structures of theRfam-Learn-Test benchmark. We abreviate Meta-LEARNA with M-LEARNA and Meta-LEARNA-Adapt with M-LEARNA-A.
Table 14: Results for 5 independent attempts on the first half of the 100 target structures of theEterna100 benchmark. We abbreviate Meta-LEARNA with M-LEARNA and Meta-LEARNA-Adaptwith M-LEARNA-A.
Table 15: Results for 5 independent attempts on the second half of the 100 target structures of theEterna100 benchmark. We abbreviate Meta-LEARNA with M-LEARNA and Meta-LEARNA-Adaptwith M-LEARNA-A.
Table 16: Results for 50 independent attempts on each of the 29 target structures of the Rfam-Taneda benchmark. We abbreviate Meta-LEARNA with M-LEARNA and Meta-LEARNA-Adapt withM-LEARNA-A.
