Table 1: A summary of data sets and models in three experiments. “Average #w” is the averagenumber of words per sentence. “Accuracy” is the model accuracy on test samples.
Table 2: Each word is highlighted with the RGB color as a linear function of its importance score.
Table 3: Results of human evaluation. “Selected” and “Masked” indicate selected words and maskedreviews respectively. Results are averaged over 200 samples. (The best numbers are highlighted.)Figure 4 provides additional visualization of the results. By masking the top pixels ranked by variousmethods, we find that the pixels picked by C-Shapley concentrate around and inside the digits inMNIST. For SampleShapley and KernelSHAP, unactivated pixels in MNIST are attributed nonzeroscores when evaluated jointly with activated pixels. While one could use post-processing by notchoosing unactivated pixels, we choose to visualize the original outputs from all algorithms forfairness of comparison. The C-Shapley also yields the most interpretable results in CIFAR10. Inparticular, C-Shapley tends to mask the parts of head and body that distinguish deers and horses,and the human riding the horse. More visualization results are available in Appendix F.
Table 4: Visualization on IMDB with Word-CNNClass	Perturbedpositive	This was the second Cinemascope spectacle that Fox produced after the Robe . Notice how some of the Roman sets are redressed to pass for Egyptian sets . The film is produced with all first class elements , beautiful photography , stirring soundtrack ( Alfred Newman and Bernard Herrmann _see if you can tell which composer scored specific scenes ). However , theprincipal acting is a bit weak . Edmund Purdom seems to have a limitedrange of《motions and is [uninteresting to watch . The ∣best performancescome from Peter Ustinov as the one _ eyed slave and Polish actress BellaDarvi as the Babylonian temptress Nefer . I find this movie in generalto be strong on plot which is rare for these large spectacles produced	at the time . All in all, of social commentary on								the film does what Egyptian				an interesting and society might have						entertaining job looked like .		negative	I saw this me abilities its no their character				vie on enough vell , ex			y because Sophie Marceau . to salve this movie . Almost CePtiOn for Sophie and，rede									However , her all cast don r∣∣, The plot			acting t play could		give a	rise	a I better I movie								if the	right		pieces		was in the right				places .		I saw	several		good			french			movies but			this one			i dont like .					negative	If it wasnt the clueless		for the performances of Barry Di, stoners , I would have no reason													^mond		and	Art Ev	ans as his to																	to		recommend t				anyone .	The	plot			centers			around a			10	year		high school				reunion ,	which		takes place		in	a		supposed				abandon		high		school ( looks more like a							prop	from a 1950s	low	budget horror flick), and the deranged student	the class pulled a	very	traumatizing prank	on . This student desires to	kill off the entire	class for revenge . John	Hughes falls in love with	his characters too much , as only one student is killed as well as the lunch lady ( Goonies Anne Ramsey ). Were led to believe that the horny coupled gets killed , but never see a blasted thing ! This is a ∣ horrible ∣ movie that																					continued National					Lampoons					downward		spiral		throughout			the	80s and		90s .
Table 4: Visualization on IMDB with Word-CNN.
Table 5: Visualization on Yahoo! Answers with LSTMClass	Perturbed																			Society, Culture		eve was the mother of ∣									cain	and		abel did				she	have any			daughters yes read						genesis			5									Family, Relationships	good		guys		why is it that women								leave me because they say								i am to				nice	please tell me they want some one who is																disrespectful like that So			and who will use them there that is what they are use to												dad was its normal			probably to themScience, Mathematics		what effect			may		global			warming		have on britain it might rain										less longer			summers				not so bloody					freezing			in	winter		oh and	the small				matter of				maybe wales					flooding			n n n nso ∣ this				global		warming			is a			bad		thing	yeah								Politics, Government	so if our				borders			need fixing				and let,s agree that they do									how do We pay for it the											united																								states I		,ongress		I seems		to come up with							all kinds of				money			for a lot of silly						things	here		are some					examples		n 75 000 for seafood waste										research n 500 000							for the arctic					winter			game	S n 300 000			for sunset and beaches in California n																350	000 for the			Chicago program for the design												installation				and maintenance				of over 950 hanging baskets											n 600			000		for	the abraham		
Table 5: Visualization on Yahoo! Answers with LSTM.
