Table 1: BLEU scores of 12 languages→English on the IWLST dataset. The BLEU scores in ()represent the difference between the multilingual model and individual models. ∆ represents theimprovements of our multi-distillation method over the multi-baseline.
Table 2: BLEU scores of English→12 languages on the IWLST dataset. The BLEU scores in ()represent the difference between the multilingual model and individual models. ∆ represents theimprovements of our multi-distillation method over the multi-baseline.
Table 3: BLEU scores of 6 languages→English on the WMT dataset. The BLEU scores in ()represent the difference between the multilingual model and individual models. ∆ represents theimprovements of our multi-distillation method over the multi-baseline.
Table 4: BLEU scores of English→ 6 languages on the WMT dataset.
Table 5: BLEU scores improvements of our method over the individual models (∆1) and multi-baseline model (∆2) on the 44 languages→English in the Ted talk dataset.
Table 6: BLEU scores of selective distillation (our method) and distillation all the time during thetraining process on the Ted talk dataset.
Table 7: BLEU scores on De-En translation with varying Top-K distillation on the IWSLT dataset.
Table 8: BLEU score improvements of the individual models with back distillation on the IWSLTdataset.
Table 9: BLEU scores of sequence-level knowledge distillation and word-level knowledge distilla-tion on the IWSLT dataset.
Table 10: BLEU score improvements of the individual models with back distillation on the IWSLTdataset.
Table 11: The training data size on the 12 IangUageS什 English on the IWSLT dataset.
Table 12: The training data size on the 6 IangUageS什EngliSh on the WMT dataset.
Table 13: The training data size on the 44 IangUageS什 English on the Ted talk dataset.
Table 14: The ISO 639-1 code of each language in our experiments. There are two extra languagecodes in our datasets: Ptbr represents Portuguese spoken in Brazil, Frca represents French spokenin Canada.
Table 15: BLEU scores of the individual and multilingual models on the 44 languages→English onthe Ted talk dataset.
