Table 1: Comparison of the full SSA model with three protein sequence alignment methods (NW-align, phmmer, and HHalign) and the structure alignment method TMalign. We measure accuracy,Pearson’s correlation (r), Spearman’s rank correlation (ρ), and average precision scores for retrievingprotein pairs with structural similarity of at least class, fold, superfamily, and family levels.
Table 2: Study of individual model components. Results of structural similarity prediction on theASTRAL 2.06 test set and secondary structure prediction are provided for embedding models trainedwith various components of our multitask framework. The SSA model trained without the languagemodel component of the encoder and without contact prediction (SSA (without language model)),the SSA, UA, and ME models trained without contact prediction (ME, UA, SSA (without contactprediction)), and the full SSA embedding model.
Table 3: Accuracy of transmembrane prediction using structural embeddings in 10-fold cross valida-tion and comparison with other transmembrane prediction methods. BiLSTM+CRF models usingeither our full SSA model embeddings or 1-hot encodings of the amino acids as features are displayedbelow the dotted line. We compare with results for a variety of transmembrane prediction methodspreviously reported on the TOPCONS dataset.
Table 4: Sequence length statistics for the SCOPe datasets. We report the mean and standard deviationalong with minimum and maximum sequence lengths.
Table 5: Comparison of encoder architectures on the ASTRAL 2.06 test set. Encoders included LMinputs and were trained using SSA without contact prediction.
Table 6: Evaluation of amino acid resampling probability and contact prediction loss weight, λ,for structural similarity prediction on the validation set. (Top) Resampling probability of 0.05is compared with no resampling for 3-layer biLSTM encoders with and without language modelcomponents that are trained using SSA without contact prediction. (Bottom) Comparison of modelstrained using the full framework with λ = 0.5, λ = 0.33, and λ = 0.1.
Table 7: Contact prediction performance of the full SSA model on the SCOP ASTRAL 2.06 test setand the 2.07 new test set. We report precision, recall, F1 score, and the area under the precision-recallcurve (AUPR) for predicting all contacts (|i - j | ≥ 2) and distant contacts (|i - j | ≥ 12) in the testset proteins. We also report precision of the top L, L/2, and L/5 predicted contacts.
Table 8: Contact prediction performance of the full SSA model on the CASP12 free modelling targetswith results of state-of-the-art co-evolution based methods for comparison. We report precision,recall, F1 score, and the area under the precision-recall curve (AUPR) for predicting all contacts(|i - j| ≥ 2) and distant contacts (|i - j| ≥ 12). We also report precision of the top L, L/2, and L/5predicted contacts.
