Figure 1: An overview of Cross-View Training. The model is trained with standard supervisedlearning on labeled examples. On unlabeled examples, auxiliary softmax layers with different viewsof the input are trained to agree with the primary softmax layer. Although the model takes ondifferent roles (i.e., as the teacher or the student), only one set of parameters is trained.
Figure 2: SoftmaX layers for image classifiers and sequence taggers. Solid red arrows representprimary softmax layers and dashed blue arrows represent auxiliary ones. To simplify the diagram,the CNN only produces four feature vectors, the BiLSTM only has a single layer, and We only showauxiliary layers for the BiLSTM,s second time step. For CNNs, auxiliary layers take a single featurevector as input. For BiLSTMs, auxiliary layers are attached to the forward and backward LSTMs.
Figure 3: Left: Ratio between the average activation of feature vectors from final layer of the CVTCNNs divided by the average from the VAT CNNs. Each square in a grid represents a single featurevector. Brighter means the feature vectors from the CVT model are more activated. Center, Right:Accuracy of prediction layers taking a single feature vector as input. The CVT model makes moreuse of the outside of the image and produces better representations for those regionsthe center of the image, where the most discriminative information is contained. This results inless effective feature vectors for the outside regions. In contrast, the model with CVT must learnmeaningful representations for the edge regions in order to train the corresponding auxiliary softmaxlayers. As these feature vectors are more useful, their magnitude become larger so they contributemore to the final representation produced by the global average pool.
Figure 4: Accuracy vs. size of the LSTMs in the first BiLSTM layer; the ones in the second layer(and MLPs in the case of dependency parsing) are half the size of the ones in the first layer. Pointsand error bars correspond to means and standard deviations over 5 runs.
