Figure 1: Illustration of Proposed Gradient Descent Method∀mx∈aXx F(x)	(1)In most real world setting, evaluating the fitness function F can be computationally demandingas is the case with our fluid simulations. The first aspect of our method is to replace F with acomputationally efficient neural network Fnet . This can offer considerable speed improvements aswe will discuss bellow. The second piece of our method is the observation that Fnet is differentiableand can be used to obtain a usable gradient in the direction of maximizing fitness. This is in contrastto F where it may be computationally infeasible to calculate the gradient and thus require othersearch techniques such as simulated annealing or genetic algorithms. Using this gradient allowsfaster optimization to be performed with fewer iterations as we will demonstrate bellow. Thereare some details that need to be addressed and to do so we go through the example problem ofoptimizing the fin heights on a heat sink.
Figure 2: The top plot shows the optimization process and final design using our gradient descentmethod. The bottom plot shows a comparison of our optimization method to simulated annealingand the differences in final designs. As we can see, the gradient descent method converges muchfaster and finds roughly the same design.
Figure 3: Comparison of steady state flow predicted by neural network and the Lattice Boltzmannflow solver. The right plot compares our network architecture (blue dots) with Guo et al. (2016)(green dots). As we can see, our network predicts forces and the max velocity more accurately thenthe other model.
Figure 4: A 2D airfoil designed by our gradient descent method. The airfoil works by producing alow pressure area above its surface.
Figure 5: A 3D airfoil designed by our gradient descent method. The cross section of the wing isvery similar to that seen in the 2D airfoil.
Figure 6: The left plot shows the change in lift drag ratio versus a change in a single design pa-rameter. We note that while there are many local optima, the surface is very smooth and producesclean gradients. The right plot shows a comparison of the gradient decent optimization to simulatedannealing in the 2D airfoil problem for a variety of starting temperatures.
Figure 7: Complete network architectures.
Figure 8: Difference between predicted heat at source of heat sink for our network and the originalsolver.
Figure 9: Example of a 2D airfoil.
