Figure 1: Information geometric context vectors. The context vectors (W) that are learnt using therecurrent neural networks are further encoded using either a Fisher vector based encoding or a Vectorof Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) based encoding (see text). Such an encoded contextvector is finally fed to a recurrent neural network based decoder.
Figure 2: Training error. We illustrate the negative log-likelihood loss function during the trainingphase. The adjacency matrix is iteratively learnt during such a training phase. We highlight thesituation after 40 epochs (red dot) and at the end of the training (after 400 epochs, green dot) whenthe back-propagation through time algorithm has converged. The paths are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Predicted path. Here, we show an example of a prediction of shortest path on theMinnesota dataset (blue graph). The A* shortest path between the source (black dot) and destination(yellow dot) nodes is represented in green. On the left-hand side, we show the prediction (magenta)after only 40 epochs of training (Figure 2). On the right-hand side, instead, we show the prediction atthe end of the training: we compute two paths, one starting from the source (magenta) and the otherfrom the destination (cyan), and finally, we intersect them to compute the predicted shortest path(red). The ‘flying-object syndrome’ only occurs during the earlier phase of training.
Figure 4: Copying task. Two results for the copying task. On the left-hand side (a), we considered abinary sequence of length 4 bounded by the start flag and the stop one. The sequence is correctlyrepeated as output by our GeoSeq2Seq method. On the right-hand side (b), instead, we show a longersequence (i.e. of length 19), which is correctly copied too.
Figure 5: Associative recall task. Two results for the associative recall task. On the left-hand side(a), we considered a sequence of 3 items, with the query of the second one. The third item is correctlyrepeated as output by our GeoSeq2Seq method. On the right-hand side (b), instead, we show a longersequence (i.e. 9 items) with the query of the second one. The third item is repeated almost correctly:the first two columns are correct, while the last one misses some components.
