Table 1: Average log-likelihood scores with standard error on small real-world data sets. The bestresults are highlighted in bold. (random) indicates a random network structure and (GMM) indicatesa fixed network structure corresponding to a Gaussian mixture model.
Table 2: Information for each large datasetDataset	Datapoints	VariablesVOxforge	3,603,643	39^Power	2,049,280	4~Network	434,873	TGasSen	8,386,765	16^MSD5	515,344	90^GasSenH	928,991	10Table 3: Average log-likelihood scores with standard error on large real-world data sets. The bestresults among the online techniques (random, oSLRAU and RealNVP online) are highlighted inbold. Results for RealNVP offline are also included for comparison purposes.
Table 3: Average log-likelihood scores with standard error on large real-world data sets. The bestresults among the online techniques (random, oSLRAU and RealNVP online) are highlighted inbold. Results for RealNVP offline are also included for comparison purposes.
Table 4: Large datasets: comparison of oSLRAU with and without early stopping (i.e., no structurelearning after one ninth of the data is processed, but still updating the parameters).
Table 5: Log likelihoods with standard error as we vary the threshold for the maximum # of variablesin a multivariate Gaussian leaf. No results are reported (dashes) when the maximum # of variablesis greater than the total number of variables.
Table 6: Average times (seconds) as we vary the threshold for the maximum # of variables in amultivariate Gaussian leaf. No results are reported (dashes) when the maximum # of variables isgreater than the total number of variables.
Table 7: Average SPN sizes (# of nodes) as we vary the threshold for the maximum # of variables ina multivariate Gaussian leaf. No results are reported (dashes) when the maximum # of variables isgreater than the total number of variables.
Table 8: Log Likelihoods for different correlation thresholds.
Table 9: Average times (seconds) as we vary the correlation threshold.
Table 10: Average SPN sizes (# of nodes) as the correlation threshold changes.
