Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Bias-Resilient Neural Network
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Presence of bias and confounding effects is inarguably one of the most critical
challenges in machine learning applications that has alluded to pivotal debates in
the recent years. Such challenges range from spurious associations of confound-
ing variables in medical studies to the bias of race in gender or face recognition
systems. One solution is to enhance datasets and organize them such that they
do not reflect biases, which is a cumbersome and intensive task. The alterna-
tive is to make use of available data and build models considering these biases.
Traditional statistical methods apply straightforward techniques such as residual-
ization or stratification to precomputed features to account for confounding vari-
ables. However, these techniques are generally not suitable for end-to-end deep
learning methods. In this paper, we propose a method based on the adversar-
ial training strategy to learn discriminative features unbiased and invariant to the
confounder(s). This is enabled by incorporating a new adversarial loss function
that encourages a vanished correlation between the bias and learned features. We
apply our method to synthetic data, medical images, and a gender classification
(Gender Shades Pilot Parliaments Benchmark) dataset. Our results show that the
learned features by our method not only result in superior prediction performance
but also are uncorrelated with the bias or confounder variables. The code is avail-
able at http://blinded_for_review/.
1	Introduction
A central challenge in practically all machine learning applications is the consideration of confound-
ing biases. Confounders are extraneous variables that distort the relationship between the input
(independent) and output (dependent) variables and hence lead to erroneous conclusions (Pourhose-
ingholi et al., 2012). In a variety of applications ranging from disease prediction to face recognition,
where machine learning models are built to predict labels from images, demographic variables (such
as age, sex, race) of the study may confound the training process if the distribution of image labels
is skewed with respect to them. In this situation, the predictor may learn the influence of the con-
founder and bias present in the data instead of actual discriminative cues.
It is a cumbersome task to account for all biases when curating large-scale datasets (Yang et al.,
2019). An alternative approach is to account for the bias in the model. Traditionally, confounding
variables are often controlled by statistical methods in either design or analytical stages (Aschengrau
& Seage, 2013). In the design stage, one can utilize randomization or matching of the confounding
variables across different study groups. In the analytical stage, confounding can be controlled by
standardization or stratification (Pourhoseingholi et al., 2012; Aschengrau & Seage, 2013).
Another common solution is to learn the influence of the confounding variables on the input (in-
dependent) variables by regression analysis. Then, the residuals derived from the optimal regres-
sion model are regarded as the confounder-free input to train the predictor (Wodtke, 2018). The
regression analysis works reasonably well under the assumption that the input variables represent
deterministic features that are comparable across a population, e.g., morphometric measurements ex-
tracted from medical images or engineered features extracted from face images. The method fails,
however, when this assumption does not hold such as for the pixel intensity values in images. Note,
the raw intensities are only meaningful within a neighborhood but variant across images. Therefore,
these regression approaches cannot be used in connection with deep learning methods that are di-
t indicates equal contribution.
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Shade 2
Shade 3
Shade 4
Shade 5
Shade 6
Shade 1
Average
Face per
Shade
tSNE Projection of
the Learned Features
(color encodes shade)
Baseline
VGG16
96.2%	97.1%	97.2%	96.1%
BR-Net
VGG16
Backbone
96.7%	93.2%
Figure 1: Average face images across each shade category (first row), average SalienCy map of the
trained baseline (second row), and BR-Net (third row) color-coded with the normalized saliency
value for each pixel. BR-Net results in more stable patterns across all 6 shade categories. The last
column shows the tSNE projection of the learned features by each method. Our method results in
a better feature space invariant to the bias variable (shade) while the baseline shows a clear pattern
affected by the bias. Average accuracy of per-shade gender classification over 5 runs of 5-fold cross-
validation is shown on each average map. The models are pre-trained on ImageNet and fine-tuned
on GS-PPB. BR-Net is not only able to close the gap of accuracy for the darker shade but it also
regularizes the model to improve per-category accuracy.
rectly applied to images, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Removing confounding
factors for CNNs is an open question we aim to address here.
We propose a feature learning scheme to produce features that are predictive of class labels while
being unbiased to confounding variables. The idea is inspired by the domain-adversarial training
approaches (Ganin et al., 2016) with controllable invariance (Xie et al., 2017) within the context
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), but we argue that generic
and widely used loss functions are not designed for controlling the invariance with respect to bias
variables. Hence, we introduce an adversarial loss function that aims to quantify the statistical
dependence between the learned features and bias variables with the correlation coefficient. This
strategy improves over the commonly used cross-entropy or mean-squared error (MSE) loss that
only aims to predict the exact value of the bias variables and thereby achieves stabler results within
the context of adversarial training. Since our proposed model injects resilience towards the bias
during training to produce confounder-invariant features, we refer to our approach as Bias-Resilient
Neural Network (BR-Net).
We evaluate BR-Net on three datasets to examine different aspects of the method and compare it
with a wide range of baselines. First, we test on a synthetic dataset to outline how the learned fea-
tures by our method are unbiased to controlled confounding variables. Then, we test it on a medical
imaging application, i.e., predicting the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) diagnosis directly
from T1-weighted Magnetic Resonance Images (MRIs). As widely explored in the HIV literature,
HIV disease accentuates brain aging (Cole et al., 2017) and if a predictor is learned not consider-
ing age as a confounder, the predictor may actually be learning the brain aging patterns rather than
actual HIV markers. Lastly, we evaluate BR-Net for gender classification using the Gender Shades
Pilot Parliaments Benchmark (GS-PPB) dataset (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). We use different
backbones pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and fine-tune them for predicting gender
from face images. We show that prediction of the vanilla models is dependent on the race of the
subject (alternatively we consider skin color quantified by the ‘shade’ variable) and show poor re-
sults for darker faces, while BR-Net can successfully close the gap. Our comparison with methods
based on multi-task (Lu et al., 2017) prediction (i.e., predicting gender and shade as two tasks) and
categorical GAN (Springenberg, 2015) (i.e., predicting shade as a categorical variable in the adver-
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
sarial component) shows that BR-Net is not only able to learn features impartial to the bias of race
(verified by feature embedding and saliency visualization), it also results in better performance in
gender prediction (see Fig. 1).
2	Related Work
Fairness in Machine Learning: In recent years, developing fair machine learning models have
been the center of many discussions (Liu et al., 2018; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Barocas et al., 2017)
even in the news outlets and media (Khullar, 2019; Miller, 2015). It has been argued that the bias
essentially comes from human or society biases induced by the training datasets (Barocas & Selbst,
2016). Recent efforts in solving this problem have been focused on building fairer and more diverse
datasets (Yang et al., 2019; Celis et al., 2016). However, this approach is not always practical
for large-scale datasets or especially in medical applications, where data is relatively scarce and
expensive to generate. In this work, we propose to use existing sets of data but to build models
mindful of biases by learning impartial features that are only predictive of the actual output variables.
Domain-Adversarial Training: (Ganin et al., 2016) proposed for the first time to use adversarial
training for domain adaptation tasks by creating a component in the network that uses the learned
features to predict which domain the data is coming from (a binary variable; source or target). Ever
since, several other works built on top of the same idea explored different loss functions (Bousmalis
et al., 2017), domain discriminator settings (Tzeng et al., 2017), or cycle-consistency (Hoffman
et al., 2017). The focus of all these works was to close the domain gap, which is often encoded as a
binary variable. To learn generic bias-resilient models, we argue that we need to go beyond this and
learn features that are invariant to either discrete or continuous confounders.
Invariant Feature Learning: There have been different attempts in the literature for learning rep-
resentations that are invariant to specific factors in the data. For instance, (Zemel et al., 2013) took
an information obfuscation approach to obfuscate membership in the protected group of data dur-
ing training, and (Bechavod & Ligett, 2017; Ranzato et al., 2007) introduced a regularization-based
method. Recently, (Xie et al., 2017; Akuzawa et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018; Elazar & Goldberg,
2018) proposed to use domain-adversarial training strategies for controllable invariant feature learn-
ing with respect to existing variables in the data. Some concurrent works (Sadeghi et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019) have also used adversarial techniques for mitigating the effect of bias. These methods
used similar adversarial loss functions as in domain adaptation that aim at predicting exact values of
the bias variables. For instance, (Wang et al., 2019) used a binary cross-entropy for removing effect
of ‘gender’ and (Sadeghi et al., 2019) used linear (and kernelized) least squares predictors as the ad-
versarial component. Our study shows that these strategies fail at creating resilience against biases
that take continuous or ordinal values. Instead, we introduce a loss function based on correlation
coefficient to naturally alleviate the bias effects on the learned features.
Distribution Matching: Some previous work attempted to learn distributionally robust techniques
to avoid learning confounded effects from data (Oren et al., 2019). This can be done by matching
the distributions of the data (Cao et al., 2018; Baktashmotlagh et al., 2016) across different domains.
However, distribution matching techniques only model data of a population as a whole and fall
short when it is crucial to remove the association between the learned features and a specific bias
or confounding variable for each single input data point. Whereas, to close the gap with respect to
the underlying bias in the data, our correlation-based analysis minimizes the bias-predictive power
of the learned features for every individual data point, which by construction harmonizes the data
distribution on the population level.
3	Bias-Resilient Neural Network (BR-Net)
Suppose we have an M -class classification problem, for which we have N pairs of training images
and their corresponding target label(s): {(Xi, yi)}iN=1. Assume that the study is confounded or
biased by a set of k variables, denoted by a vector b ∈ Rk . To train a deep neural network for
classifying each image to its label(s) while not being biased by the confounders in the study, we
propose our end-to-end architecture as in Fig. 2 similar to domain-adversarial training approaches
(Ganin et al., 2016). Given the input image X, we first apply a Feature Extraction (FE) network,
resulting in a feature vector F. A Classifier (C) is built on top of this feature vector to predict the
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
X
Lc(y,攵)
θ∕e
∂(Lc-λLbp)
~匹~
∂Lc
而C
?Lbp
国
Feature
Extraction
(FE)
Classification
(C)	θc
Bias Prediction
⑱P)	θbp
4p(b,b)
Figure 2: BR-Net architecture: FE learns features, F, that successfully classify (C) the input while
being invariant (not correlated) to the bias variable(s), b, using BP and the adversarial loss compo-
nent, -λLbp, which is based on correlation coefficient. Forward arrows show forward paths while
the backward dashed ones indicate back-propagation with the respective gradient values.
class label y for the input X, and it forces FE to learn discriminative futures for the classification
task. Now, to guarantee that these features are not biased to b, we build another network (denoted
by BP) with a new loss function for predicting the bias variables from F. We propose to back-
propagate this loss to the feature extraction module in an adversarial way. As a result, the feature
extractor learns features that minimize the classification loss, while maximizing the bias predictor
loss.
Each network has its underlying trainable parameters, defined as θfe for FE, θc for C, and
θbp for BP. If the predicted probability that subject i belongs to class m is defined by yim =
C(FE(Xi; θfe); θc), the classification loss can be characterized by a cross-entropy:
NM
Lc(X, y; θfe, θc) = - XX yim lθg(0im)∙	⑴
i=1 m=1
Similarly, with bi = BP(FE(Xi； θfe); θbp), we can define the adversarial component of the loss
function. Standard methods for designing this loss function suggest to use a cross-entropy for bi-
nary/categorical variables (e.g., in (Ganin et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2017)) or an `2 MSE loss for
continuous variables. However, we argue that in the context of bias control, the ultimate goal of
adversarial training is to remove statistical association with respect to the bias variables, as opposed
to maximizing the prediction error of them. In fact, the adversarial training based on MSE leads
to the maximization of the `2 distance between b and b, which could be trivially achieved by uni-
formly shifting the magnitude of b, thereby potentially resulting in an ill-posed optimization and
oscillation in the adversarial training. To address this issue, we define the following surrogate loss
for predicting the bias confounders while quantifying the statistical dependence with respect to b:
k
Lbp(X, b; θfe, θbp) = — X corr2(bκ, bκ),	⑵
κ=1
where corr2(∙, ∙) is the squared Pearson correlation between its inputs and bκ defines the vector of
κth bias variable across all inputs. Through adversarial training, we aim to remove statistical depen-
dence by encouraging a zero correlation between b and bκ. Note, BP deems to maximize squared
correlation and FE minimizes for it; Since corr2 is bounded in the range [0, 1], both minimization
and maximization schemes are deemed feasible. Having these loss functions defined, the overall
objective of the network is then defined as
min max Lc(X, y; θfe, θc) - λLbp(X,b; θfe,θbp).	(3)
θfe,θc θbp
where hyperparameter λ controls the trade-off between the two objectives.
This scheme is similar to GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and domain-adversarial training (Ganin
et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2017), in which a min-max game is portrayed between two networks. In our
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
case, FE extracts features that minimize the classification criterion, while fooling BP (i.e., making
BP incapable of predicting the bias variables). Hence, the saddle point for this optimization objective
is obtained when the parameters θfe minimize the classification loss while maximizing the loss of
the bias prediction module. Simultaneously, θc and θbp minimize their respective network losses.
3.1	Theoretical Property
In general, a zero-correlation or a zero-covariance only quantifies linear independence between vari-
ables but cannot infer non-linear relationships. However, we now theoretically show that, under
certain assumptions on the adversarial training of BP, a zero-covariance would guarantee the mean
independence (Wooldridge, 2010) between bias variables and features, a much stronger type of sta-
tistical independence than the linear type.
A random variable B is said to be mean independent of F if and only if E[B|F = ξ] = E[B] for
all ξ with non-zero probability, where E[∙] defines the expected value. In other words, the expected
value of B is neither linearly nor non-linearly dependent on F , but the variance of B might. The
following theorem then relates the mean independence between features F and bias variables B to
the zero-covariance between B and the prediction of B produced by the adversarial component, BP.
Property 1: B is mean independent of B ⇒ Cov(B, B) = 0.
Property 2: B, F are mean independent ⇒ B is mean independent of B = φ(F) for any mapping
function φ.
Theorem 1. Given random variables F, B, B with finite second moment,
B is mean independent of F ⇔ for any arbitrary mapping φ, s.t. B = φ(F), cov(B, B) = 0
Proof. The forward direction ⇒ follows directly through Property 1 and 2. We focus the proof
on the reverse direction. Now, construct a mapping function B = φ(F) = E[B|F], i.e., φ(ξ) =
E[B∣F = ξ], then Cov(B, B) = 0 implies
EBE[B|F] = E[B]EE[B|F].	(4)
Due to the self-adjointness of the mapping B 7→ E[B|F], the left hand side of Eq. (4) reads
E[BE[B∣F]] = E [(E[B∣F])2] = E[232]. By the law oftotal expectation E[E[B∣F]] = E[B], the
right hand side of Eq. (4) becomes E[B]2. By Jensen,s (in)equality, E[B2] = E[B]2 holds if and
only ifB is a constant, i.e., by definition, B is mean independent ofF.
□
Remark. In practice we normalize the covariance by standard deviations of variables for optimiza-
tion stability. In the unlikely singular case that BP outputs a constant prediction, we add a small
perturbation in computing the standard deviation.
This theorem echoes the validity of our adversarial training strategy: FE encourages a zero-
correlation between bκ and bκ, which enforces bκ to be mean independent of F (one cannot infer
the expected value of bκ from F). In turn, assuming BP has the capacity to approximate any ar-
bitrary mapping function, the mean independence between features and bias would correspond to
a zero-correlation between bκ and bκ, otherwise BP would adversarially optimize for a mapping
function that increases the correlation.
3.2	Implementation Details
Similar to the training of GANs, in each iteration, we first back-propagate the Lc loss to update θfe
and θc. With θfe fixed, we then minimize the Lbp loss to update θbp. Finally, with θbp fixed, we
maximize the Lbp loss to update θfe. The last step can be considered as the bias effect removal
component. Furthermore, in the present study, Lbp depends on the correlation operation, which
is a population-based operation, as opposed to individual-level error metrics such as cross-entropy
or MSE losses. Therefore, we calculate the correlations over each training batch as a batch-level
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
operation. Depending on the application, we can use different architectures for each of the three
subnetworks. We use a 3D CNN (Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2018; Nie et al., 2016) for FE to extract
features from 3D medical images and use VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) and ResNet50
(He et al., 2015) backbones for GS-PPB. For C and BP, we use a two-layer fully connected network.
4	Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our method on three different scenarios. First, we run a synthetic exper-
iment to verify the validity of our assumptions. Then, we apply BR-Net to predict diagnosis of HIV
from brain MRIs confounded by the subjects’ age. Finally, we test the model for predicting gender
from face images and show how controlling for variables related to race (e.g., face color shade) can
robustly enhance prediction performance. We compare BR-Net with several baselines, and evaluate
how the features learned by our method are invariant to the bias or confounding variables.
Baseline Methods. In line with the implementation of our approach, the baseline for all three
experiments is a vanilla CNN, whose architecture is exactly the same as BR-net except that there is
no bias prediction sub-network and hence the adversarial loss. We emphasize that BR-Net aims to
remove the association between prediction and bias by encouraging vanished correlation, which is
different from simply maximizing the prediction loss (w.r.t bias) as usually performed in many GAN
settings. Therefore, the second comparison method is a BR-Net with the adversarial loss being the
MSE, denoted by ‘BR-Net (w/ MSE).’ For the Gender Shades PPB experiment, we further add two
other baseline methods, one predicting both ‘gender’ and ‘shade’ in a multi-task setting (Lu et al.,
2017), denoted by ‘Multi-Task’; and one replacing correlation loss function Lbp with a cross-entropy
loss as the ‘shade’ variable has a ordinal but categorical value. The adversarial training then relies
on maximizing the entropy of BP predictions as motivated in Categoral GAN models (‘CatGAN’)
(Springenberg, 2015). These baselines show how the correlation loss plays an important role in
delineating the bias and confounding effects.
4.1	Synthetic Data
We generate a synthetic dataset comprised of two groups of data, each containing 512 images of
resolution 32 × 32 pixels. Each image is generated by 4 Gaussians (see Fig. 3a), the magnitude
of which is controlled by σA and σB. For each image from Group 1, we sample σA and σB from
a uniform distribution U(1, 4) while we generate images of Group 2 with stronger intensities by
sampling from U(3, 6). Gaussian noise is added to the images with standard deviation 0.01. Now
we assume the difference in σA between the two groups is associated with the true discriminative
cues that should be learned by a classifier, whereas σB is a given confounder. In other words, an
unbiased model should predict the group label purely based on the two diagonal Gaussians and not
dependent on the two off-diagonal ones. To show that the BR-Net can result in such models by
controlling for σB, we train it on the whole dataset of 1,024 images given their respective binary
labels and confounder values σB .
For simplicity, we construct the FE Network with 3 stacks of 2 × 2 convolution/ReLU/max-pooling
layers to produce 32 features. Both the BP and C networks have one hidden layer of dimension
16 with tanh as the non-linear activation function. After training, BR-Net achieves 89% training
accuracy and BR-Net w/ MSE achieves 90%. Note that the theoretically maximum training accu-
racy is 90% due to the overlapping sampling range of σA between the two groups. The baseline
model, however, achieves 95% accuracy, indicating that the model additionally relies on the con-
founding effects σB for predicting the group label, an undesired behavior. To further investigate
the association between the learned features and σB , we measure their squared distance correlation
(dcor2) (Szekely et al., 2007) for the training samples in Group 1 (when there is no association be-
tween σB and prediction, dcor=0 for either group). Distance correlation is a widely-used measure
of dependence between two paired vectors of arbitrary dimensions. Fig. 3b shows that our method
successfully removes the statistical association w.r.t σB as the distance correlation drops dramat-
ically with training iterations. On the other hand, the baseline model without the BP component
learns features that constantly yield high correlation. Note that the adversarial loss based on MSE
yields unstable dcor2 measures potentially due to the ill-posed optimization of maximizing `2 dis-
tance. Finally, the above results are further supported by the 2D tSNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008)
projection of the learned features as shown in Fig. 3c. The feature space learned by the baseline
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
(a) Image synthesis
(b) Distance correlation w.r.t σB
(C) tSNE projection of the learned features for CNN (left), BR-Net w/ MSE (middle), and BR-Net (right)
Table 1: Balanced accuracy, F1-score, and area
under curve (AUC) of HIV diagnosis prediction.
Best results in each column are typeset in bold.
Method	bAcc	F1	AUC
Resid+SVM	69.5	0.65	71.2
Baseline (3D CNN)	71.8	0.64	80.8
BR-Net (w/ MSE)	64.8	0.58	75.2
BR-Net (Ours)	74.2	0.67	80.9
Figure 3: Comparison of results on the synthetic dataset. Color indicates the value of σB.
learned features and age for the CTRL cohort.
model forms a clear correlation with σB , whereas our method results in a space with no apparent
bias. This confirms that the proposed adversarial technique successfully removes the bias from the
confounding variable.
4.2	Prediction of HIV Diagnosis Based on Medical Images
Our second task aims at predicting the diagnosis of HIV patients vs.control subjects (CTRL) based
on brain MRIs. The study cohort includes 223 CTRLs and 122 HIV patients who are seropositive
for the HIV-infection with CD4 count > 100 瞿(average: 303.0). Since the HIV subjects are sig-
nificantly older in age than the CTRLs (CTRL: 45 ± 17, HIV: 51 ± 8.3, p < .001) in this study, age
becomes a potential confounder; prediction of diagnosis labels may be dependent on subjects’ age
instead of true HIV markers. The T1-weighted MRIs are all skull stripped, affinely registered to a
common template, and resized into a 64 × 64 × 64 volume. Classification accuracy is measured with
5-fold cross validation. For each run, the training folds are augmented by random shifting (within
one-voxel distance), rotation (within one degree) in all 3 directions, and left-right flipping based on
the assumption that HIV infection affects the brain bilaterally (Adeli et al., 2018). The data aug-
mentation results in a balanced training set of 1024 CTRLs and 1024 HIVs. As the flipping removes
left-right orientation, the ConvNet is built on half of the 3D volume containing one hemisphere. The
feature extractor FE has 4 stacks of 2×2×2 3D convolution/ReLu/batch-normalization/max-pooling
layers yielding 4096 intermediate features. Both BP and C have one hidden layer of dimension 128
with tanh as the activation function. For this experiment, as suggested in the previous work (Rao
et al., 2017), confounding effects can only be reliably estimated among healthy subjects. So, in
practice we only perform the adversarial loss back-propagation step for the CTRL group.
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
5-fold CV classification accuracy Baseline
Figure 5: Accuracy, true negative, and true positive rates of the HIV diagnosis experiment, as a
function of the number of iterations for (a) the 3D CNN baseline, (b) BR-Net. The results show
that our adversarial training with a correlation loss function is robust against the imbalanced age
distribution between HIV and CTRL subjects and achieves balanced prediction for both cohorts.
tSNE of learned features using Baseline (3D CNN)
tSNE of the leaned features using BR-Net (Ours)
Figure 6: tSNE visualization of the learned features by (a) the 3D CNN baseline and (b) our BR-Net.
Each point shows a subject in the CTRL cohort color-coded by their age.
Table 1 shows the diagnosis prediction accuracy of BR-Net in comparison with 3D CNN, BR-
Net (w/ MSE), and Resid+SVM (note, to compare with the traditional residualization methods, we
extract 298 brain regional measurements, residualize the confounders using a general linear model,
and classify with a support vector machine). Our method (BR-Net) results in the most accurate
prediction in terms of balanced accuracy (bAcc), area under curve (AUC), and F1 -score from the
cross-validation. These results show that our method is able to learn discriminative features while
controlling for confounders. In addition, we record the balanced accuracy, true positive, and true
negative rate for each training iteration. As shown in Fig. 5, the baseline tends to predict most
subjects as CTRLs (high true negative rate). This is potentially caused by the CTRL group having
a wider age distribution, so an age-dependent predictor would bias the prediction towards CTRL.
On the other hand, when controlling age as a confounder, BR-Net reliably results in balanced true
positive and true negative rates.
Similar to the previous experiment, we train different methods on the entire dataset and plot the
squared distance correlation between the learned features and confounders for the CTRL cohort
(Fig. 4). The figure shows that for BR-Net the distance correlation between the features and the
confounding variable (age) decreases with the adversarial training. Whereas, the baseline model 3D
CNN consistently produces features that are highly correlated with the confounder, and BR-Net w/
MSE produces inconsistent and unreliable associations with respect to the confounder. The t-SNE
(Maaten & Hinton, 2008) projection of the learned feature spaces are visualized in Fig. 6. The
feature space learned by the baseline model forms a clear association with age, as older subjects are
concentrated on the top left region of the space. This again suggests predictions from the baseline
may be dependent on age rather than true HIV markers. Whereas, our method results in a space with
no apparent bias to age.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Results on Gender Shades Dataset - VGG16 Backbone
Figure 7: Accuracy of gender prediction from face images across all shades (1 to 6) of the GS-PPB
dataset with two backbones, (left) VGG16 and (right) ReSNet50. BR-Net consistently results in
more accurate predictions in all 6 shade categories by injecting bias-resilience into the model.
tSNE of learned features by Baseline (VGG16)
tSNE of learned features by the Multi-Task model
Figure 8: tSNE visualization of the learned features by (a) the VGG16 baseline, (b) a multi-task
baseline, and (c) our BR-Net. Each point shows an image in the dataset color-coded with ‘shade’.
4.3	Gender Prediction Using the GS-PPB Dataset
The last experiment is on gender prediction from face images in the Gender Shades Pilot Parliaments
Benchmark (GS-PPB) dataset (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). This dataset contains 1,253 facial
images of 561 female and 692 male subjects. The face shade is quantified by the Fitzpatricksix-point
labeling system and is categorised from type 1 (lighter) to type 6 (darker). This quantization was
used by dermatologistsuse for skin classification and determining risk for skin cancer (Buolamwini
& Gebru, 2018).
To train our models on this dataset, we use backbones VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) and
ResNet50 (He et al., 2015) pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). We fine-tune each model
on GS-PPB dataset to predict the gender of subjects based on their face images using fair 5-fold
cross-validation. The ImageNet dataset for pre-training the models has fewer cases of humans with
darker faces (Yang et al., 2019), and hence the resulting models have an underlying bias to the shade.
BR-Net counts the variable ‘shade’ as an ordinal and categorical bias variable. As discussed earlier,
besides the vanilla VGG16 and ResNet50 models, we compare the results with a multi-task baseline
(Lu et al., 2017), which predicts both ‘gender’ and ‘shade’ simultaneously, and a model that uses the
entropy loss as the adversarial loss for the cross-entropy-based categorical prediction (proposed by
CatGAN (Springenberg, 2015)). Table 2 shows the results across five runs of 5-fold cross-validation.
Fig. 7 plots the accuracy for each individual ‘shade’ category. As can be seen from the table and
Table 2: Average results over five runs of 5-fold cross-validation on the GS-PPB dataset. Best results
in each column are typeset in bold.
VGG16 Backbone	ResNet50 Backbone
Method	bAcc	F1	AUC	bAcc	F1	AUC
Baseline	94.1 ± 0.2	93.5 ± 0.3	98.9 ± 0.1 ^^	75.7 ± 2.0	68.0 ± 3.0	96.2 ± 0.3
CatGAN	96.0 ± 0.5	95.7 ± 0.5	99.4 ± 0.2	90.1 ± 1.0	90.0 ± 1.0	96.3 ± 0.7
Multi-Task	94.0 ± 0.3	93.4 ± 0.3	98.9 ± 0.1	94.0 ± 0.3	93.4 ± 0.3	98.6 ± 0.3
BR-Net	96.3 ± 0.6	96.0 ± 0.7	99.4 ± 0.2	94.1 ± 0.2	93.6 ± 0.2	98.6 ± 0.1
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
the figure, BR-Net outperforms other methods on average while producing similar accuracy across
all ‘shade’ categories. Prediction made by other methods, however, is more dependent on the bias
variable by showing inconsistent recognition capabilities for different ‘shade’ categories and failing
significantly on darker faces. This bias is confirmed by the tSNE projection of the feature spaces
learned by different methods (see Fig. 8). The features learned by the vanilla baseline or even the
multi-task model show a clear dependency on the ‘shade’ while BR-Net results in a roughly uniform
distribution of subjects.
To gain more insight into the results, we visualize the saliency maps derived for the baseline and
BR-Net. For this purpose, we use a similar technique as in (Simonyan et al., 2014) to extract the
pixels in the original image space highlighting the areas that are discriminative for the gender labels.
Generating such saliency maps for all inputs, we visualize the average map for each individual
‘shade’ category (Fig. 1). The value on each pixel corresponds to the attention from the network
to that pixel within the classification process. Compared to the baseline, BR-Net focuses more on
specific face regions and results in more stable patterns across all ‘shade’ categories.
5	Conclusion
We proposed a method based on adversarial training strategies by encouraging vanished correlation
to learn features for the prediction task while being unbiased to the confounding variables in the
study. We evaluated our bias-resilient neural network (BR-Net) on a synthetic, a medical diagnosis,
and a gender prediction dataset. In all experiments, BR-Net resulted in a feature embedding space
that was agnostic to the bias in the data while all other methods failed to do so. Based on our
experiments we can conclude that, besides the attempt to improve datasets and curate unbiased ones
(Yang et al., 2019), it is crucial to build models that properly account for the bias in data during
training. Our bias-resilient model and some other recent works set on foot toward this direction.
This is crucial as machine learning models are acceding to everyday lives, or are being developed
for crucial medical applications. Failure to account for the underlying bias or confounding effects
can lead to spurious associations and erroneous decisions. As a direction for the future work, other
strategies such as deep canonical correlation analysis (Andrew et al., 2013) can be explored to form
the adversarial component.
References
Ehsan Adeli et al. Chained regularization for identifying brain patterns specific to HIV infection.
NeuroImage,183:425-437, 2018.
Kei Akuzawa, Yusuke Iwasawa, and Yutaka Matsuo. Adversarial invariant feature learning with
accuracy constraint for domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12543, 2019.
Galen Andrew, Raman Arora, Jeff Bilmes, and Karen Livescu. Deep canonical correlation analysis.
In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1247-1255, 2013.
Ann Aschengrau and George R Seage. Essentials of epidemiology in public health. Jones & Bartlett
Publishers, 2013.
Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, Mehrtash Harandi, and Mathieu Salzmann. Distribution-matching embed-
ding for visual domain adaptation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):3760-3789,
2016.
Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. Calif. L. Rev., 104:671, 2016.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness in machine learning. NIPS Tutorial,
2017.
Yahav Bechavod and Katrina Ligett. Learning fair classifiers: A regularization-inspired approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00044, pp. 1733-1782, 2017.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, Nathan Silberman, David Dohan, Dumitru Erhan, and Dilip Krishnan.
Unsupervised pixel-level domain adaptation with generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3722-3731, 2017.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commer-
Cial gender classification. In Conference onfairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77-91,
2018.
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Unsupervised domain adaptation with distribution
matching machines. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
L Elisa Celis, Amit Deshpande, Tarun Kathuria, and Nisheeth K Vishnoi. How to be fair and diverse?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07183, 2016.
James Cole et al. Increased brain-predicted aging in treated HIV disease. Neurology, 88(14):1349-
1357, 2017.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 248-255. Ieee, 2009.
Yanai Elazar and Yoav Goldberg. Adversarial removal of demographic attributes from text data. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
11-21, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Soheil Esmaeilzadeh, Dimitrios Ioannis Belivanis, Kilian M Pohl, and Ehsan Adeli. End-to-end
alzheimers disease diagnosis and biomarker identification. In MICCAI-MLMI, 2018.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Franccois
Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
works. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2096-2030, 2016.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS, 2014.
Tatsunori B Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
demographics in repeated loss minimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2018.
K He, X Zhang, S Ren, and J Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. computer vision
and pattern recognition (cvpr). In 2016 IEEE Conference on, volume 5, pp. 6, 2015.
Judy Hoffman, Eric Tzeng, Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Phillip Isola, Kate Saenko, Alexei A Efros,
and Trevor Darrell. Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain adaptation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.03213, 2017.
Dhruv Khullar. A.I. could worsen health disparities, 2019. URL https://www.nytimes.
com/2019/01/31/opinion/ai-bias-healthcare.html.
Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
machine learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Yongxi Lu, Abhishek Kumar, Shuangfei Zhai, Yu Cheng, Tara Javidi, and Rogerio Feris. Fully-
adaptive feature sharing in multi-task networks with applications in person attribute classification.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5334-
5343, 2017.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. JMLR, 9, 2008.
Clair Miller. Algorithms and bias, 2015. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/
upshot/algorithms-and-bias-q-and-a-with-cynthia-dwork.html.
Dong Nie, Han Zhang, Ehsan Adeli, Luyan Liu, and Dinggang Shen. 3d deep learning for multi-
modal imaging-guided survival time prediction of brain tumor patients. In International Confer-
ence on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 212-220. Springer,
2016.
Yonatan Oren, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust lan-
guage modeling. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2019.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Mohamad Amin Pourhoseingholi, Ahmad Reza Baghestani, and Mohsen Vahedi. How to control
confounding effects by statistical analysis. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench, 5(2):79, 2012.
Marc’aurelio Ranzato, Fu Jie Huang, Y-Lan Boureau, and Yann LeCun. Unsupervised learning of
invariant feature hierarchies with applications to object recognition. In 2007 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1-8. IEEE, 2007.
Anil Rao et al. Predictive modelling using neuroimaging data in the presence of confounds. Neu-
roImage, 150:23-49, 2017.
Bashir Sadeghi, Runyi Yu, and Vishnu Boddeti. On the global optima of kernelized adversarial rep-
resentation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 7971-7979, 2019.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. In ICLR, 2015.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In ICLR, 2014.
Jost Tobias Springenberg. Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning with categorical generative
adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06390, 2015.
Gabor J Szekely, Maria L Rizzo, Nail K Bakirov, et al. Measuring and testing dependence by
correlation of distances. The annals of statistics, 35(6):2769-2794, 2007.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial discriminative domain
adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 7167-7176, 2017.
Tianlu Wang, Jieyu Zhao, Mark Yatskar, Kai-Wei Chang, and Vicente Ordonez. Balanced datasets
are not enough: Estimating and mitigating gender bias in deep image representations. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5310-5319, 2019.
Geoffrey T Wodtke. Regression-based adjustment for time-varying confounders. Sociological Meth-
ods & Research, pp. 0049124118769087, 2018.
Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (2nd ed.). The MIT
Press, London, 2010.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Yulun Du, Eduard Hovy, and Graham Neubig. Controllable invariance
through adversarial feature learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
585-596, 2017.
Kaiyu Yang, Klint Qinami, Li Fei-Fei, Jia Deng, and Olga Russakovsky. Towards fairer datasets:
Filtering and balancing the distribution of the people subtree in the imagenet hierarchy. Image-
Net, 2019.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 325-333, 2013.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with adver-
sarial learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp.
335-340. ACM, 2018.
12