Stagnant zone segmentation with U-net
Selam Waktola*
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Lodz University of Technology
Lodz, Poland
selam.waktola@gmail.com
Laurent Babout
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Lodz University of Technology
Lodz, Poland
Abstract— Silo discharging and monitoring the process for
industrial or research application depend on computerized
segmentation of different parts of images such as stagnant and
flowing zones which is the toughest task. X-ray Computed
Tomography (CT) is one of a powerful non-destructive technique
for cross-sectional images of a 3D object based on X-ray
absorption. CT is the most proficient for investigating different
granular flow phenomena and segmentation of the stagnant zone
as compared to other imaging techniques. In any case, manual
segmentation is tiresome and erroneous for further investigations.
Hence, automatic and precise strategies are required. In the
present work, a U-net architecture is used for segmenting the
stagnant zone during silo discharging process. This proposed
image segmentation method provides fast and effective outcomes
by exploiting a convolutional neural networks technique with an
accuracy of 97 percent.
Keywords—U-net segmentation; deep neural networks; stagnant
zone; X-ray tomography
I.	Introduction
In many industries, like in mining, agriculture, civil
engineering, and pharmaceutical manufacturing; silo is used for
protecting, storing and loading granular materials into process
machinery [1]. During the silo discharging process, there are
two major types of flow: namely, “funnel” and “mass” flows
[2]. In the case of mass flow, all granulates discharge with a
uniform downward velocity across the entire cross-section area.
Whereas, in the case of funnel flow, in which this paper focuses
on and characterized by granular is flowing only in the center of
the silo and creating a stagnant zone at the walls of the
container [2,3].
The hopper geometry, internal friction between particles and
wall all have a direct impact on the flow type [4]. In order to
understand and describe the flow behavior and evaluating the
silo wall pressures, the knowledge of the density distribution
within the bulk solid is very important aspect [5]. Furthermore,
during funnel flow, the shape and size of the stagnant zone
depend on different factors including the granular material, the
bin wall roughness, the initial packing density and filling level
[6].
Krzysztof Grudzien
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Lodz University of Technology
Lodz, Poland
X-ray Computed tomography (CT) is one of the most
powerful 3D imaging techniques among available tomographic
techniques due to its high-resolution capability. For the last two
decades CT has been used as a non-destructive method to
characterize objects, visualize flows, analyze concentration
changes of the bulk solid during silo discharging process [5
,7,8]. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) [9,10] and Electrical
Capacitance Tomography (ECT) [11 -14] are also some of the
techniques used to visualize concentration changes during flows
of granular materials.
Even though convolutional neural network (CNN) has
recently become popular and has increasingly been used as an
alternative to many traditional pattern recognition problems, its
application for segmenting stagnant zones of X-ray CT images
is not common. For processing and analyzing process
tomography data, artificial neural network algorithms were
applied in electrical impedance tomography images [15-17].
This paper proposed a deep neural networks technique for
segmenting the stagnant zone automatically. The main
advantage of the proposed approach is an effective
segmentation for acquiring the desired characteristics of flow
parameters without prior image processing or expert guidance.
II.	Experimental set-up using X-ray tomography
An especially designed model silo, with rectangular bin,
allowed carrying out in situ experiments. The bin part is 10 cm
wide, 5 cm deep and 20 cm high. The left and right hopper
angles can be independently set to generate different types of
flows, i.e. mass and funnel flows, with concentric/eccentric
discharging modes. The silo model design was easily
customizable to shift the outlet position and the angle between
the hopper and the silo with respect to the vertical. The silo
material is polycarbonate with 5 mm thickness. The outlet width
is manually set, which allows controlling the discharge velocity.
During concentric flow, both hoppers’ angles are set to the
same value. In order to observe the eccentric flow, these angles
are set to a different value. The non-symmetric silo construction
causes shift silo outlet to the left or right side, in the direction of
the larger angle.
The time-lapse studies were performed at INSA-Lyon
(France) using a GE Phoenix v|tome|x device (see Fig. 1). The
device is equipped with a high energy X-ray microfocus source
(up to 160 kV) with a 4 μm spot size. The detector is equipped
with a 1500X1920 pixels (with a pixel size of 127X127 μm2).
Fig. 2 presented a picture of the silo model inside X-ray
tomography hutch. During measurements, the distance between
the X-ray source and the detector was equal to 577 mm and
voxel size 160 um. Sorghum and rice have been used as a
granular material during the experimental campaign of this
study.
Fig. 1. X-ray Computed Tomography system with silo model.
III.	THREE-DIMENSIONAL SEGMENTATION
Cross-sectional views of the X-ray tomography of initially
loosely packed rice with smooth silo bin walls are presented in
Fig. 2.
(b)
Fig. 2.	(a) front side scan at x=200 voxel. (b) top side scan at z=400 voxel.
The main aim of this study was to find an effective way of
segmenting the stagnant zone during eccentric discharging
modes. After the initial packing density scan was performed,
the outlet of the silo was opened for about 2 second and the next
scan was carried out till all granulate are discharged out from
the silo. Thus, to analyze the concentration changes, the
absolute difference between two successive scans has been
computed and it shows the formation of the stagnant zone in the
case of funnel flow. Fig. 3c presents concentration changes
during eccentric discharging mode (angle between the hopper
and the Silo With respect to the vertical axis was 30° and 20°) and
it reveals the evolution of the stagnant zone at the right side of
the image with a good contrast in which the hopper angle was
20°.
Fig. 3. Silo hopper angle: 30° on the left and 20° on the right side view in the
middle of the silo where x=200 pixel. (a) Second scan. (b) Third scan. (c)
The absolute difference between scan three and four of sorghum.
The last step consists in segmenting the stagnant zones. By
using a three-dimensional Otsu threshold method it was
possible to compute the stagnant zone mask as presented in
Fig.4.
Fig. 4.	(a) Ground truth at x=240 (b) segmentation using Otsu at x=240 (c)
superimposing ground truth and Otsu segmentation at x=240 with red
color and ground truth with white.
Although the Otsu method was able to segment the stagnant
zone, it is hard to get 100% accurate segmentation out of it.
Since some particles in the flow zone may shift in the position
of another particle, giving an impression of no movement based
on the absolute difference. Thus, such kind of effect could
hinder the segmentation result. As a result, a deep neural
networks approach has been applied for effective segmentation
and explained hereafter.
IV.	U-net based deep convolutional networks
The main advantage of the proposed approach is an
effective segmentation for acquiring the desired characteristics
of flow parameters without prior image processing or expert
guidance. From several deep neural networks, u-net is one of
the successful architecture which is used in different image
segmentation tasks. Originally u-net neural network architecture
was built for performing semantic segmentation on a small bio-
medical data-set [18]. The architecture is computationally
efficient and trainable with a small dataset, which is a core
advantage for datasets like in material science where the little
amount of labelled data is available. Despite it might be good
and well-fitted in bio-medical tasks, it needs to be tuned again
for fitting the granular material X-ray CT image segmentation
task investigated in this study. Thus, the u-net neural network
architecture and hyper-parameters values are adjusted in order
to get good segmentation results.
The network has been trained on 2D segmentation and then
it can find the whole 3D volume segmentation of a new scan in
which the network has never seen before. As each of the CT
images already contain repetitive structures with the
corresponding variation, only very few images are required to
train a network that generalizes reasonably well. One of the
major modifications is that the original u-net used stochastic
gradient descent optimizer [18], but this modified u-net
architecture used Adam optimizer [19] to minimize the
categorical cross-entropy objective.
During training, 40 images were selected for the training
and test dataset. The dataset was first divided into two subsets,
train, and test. The first subset contains 30 images in which
80% were used for training and 20% for validation. The trained
model was next tested on the second subset which contains the
remaining 10 images. During training, 30 manually annotated
ground truth segmentations were used to train the network to
recognize the stagnant zone borders. Since the available dataset
is small, an extensive amount of data augmentations has been
applied to improve the performance of the network. The testing
datasets were used for the evaluation of the network
performance.
Fig. 5 illustrates the comparison between the ground truth,
segmentation by using Otsu and predicted segmentation by the
modified u-net trained model for the same 2D image. As the
result shows, Otsu segmentation is too sensitive for gradient
changes and the trained model predicted a smooth segmentation
like the ground truth.
positives + false negatives + false positives). Table 1 presents
the result of the experiment for segmenting stagnant zone.
Network architecture	IoU
Original U-Net	0.95
Modified U-Net	0.97
Table 1. Model performances on segmenting stagnant zone.
Once after having trained model using the CNN method, the
end-to-end 3D automatic segmentation offers an effective and
fast segmentation of stagnant zone during silo discharging
process. The key advantage of this method could be used for
deep investigation of flow characteristics without utilizing any
prior image processing methods or expert guidance. For both
the Otsu and the trained model execution time (on CPU) were
compared for generating one segmented image. The Otsu
segmentation took around 4 sec per one 2D image. Where else
the trained model took less than a second for generating its
prediction for a given input image.
In order to prove that the trained model (which used the
sorghum grains flow as a training dataset) could generate the
stagnant zone segmentation for completely different scan and
grain material, it was tested by pre-processing two 3D scans of
rice grains flow. The result shows that the trained model was
able to generate predicted segmentation successfully. Fig. 6
presents two major steps for generating the stagnant zone
prediction of new scans having similar flow property (in this
case rice grains flow). The first step was computing the absolute
difference of two successive scans and then this new scan was
given as an input to the trained model. Finally, the trained
model generates the stagnant zone segmentation as shown in
Fig. 6d. Fig. 7 illustrates 3D dense segmentation of rice grains
flow by superimposing the predicted mask into the original
scan.
Fig. 6.	(a) Rice scan 3 (b) Rice scan 4 (c) the absolute difference between
scan 3 and scan 4 (d) stagnant zone prediction.
Fig. 5.	(a) Original image (b) Ground truth (c) segmented by using Otsu (d)
modified u-net model prediction.
Intersection over Union (IoU) is used as an accuracy
measure to compare dropped out ground truth slices to the
predicted results. The IoU score is a standard performance
measure for the object category segmentation problem. Given a
set of images, the IoU measure gives the similarity between the
predicted region and the ground-truth region for an object
present in the set of images and is defined as true positives/(true
(a)	(b)
(c)	(d)
Flowing zone
Fig. 7. Original rice grains flow scan 4 (a) front side view (b) left side view;
the network predicted dense segmentation (c) ) front side view (d) left
side view .
V.	Conclusion
In order to analyse the X-ray CT data that has been acquired
from different experimental campaigns and complex structure
of granular material flows, it can be tedious and extremely time-
consuming for manual analysis. This paper presents a new
approach for automatic segmentation of the stagnant zone in an
effective way by exploiting the CNN technique. The main
advantages of the proposed approach are the speed and effective
segmentation for acquiring the desired characteristic flow
parameters. Once having the trained model, it was tested that
the model could generate a predicted segmentation in less than a
second for a given completely new granular material flow
image with an accuracy of 97%. The accuracy of the CNN
approach could also probably be further improved if the
delineations of the ground truth were acquired from different
experts and more number of dataset was used. Moreover, the
architecture of the model could be modified to accommodate
3D volumes of images as an input for processing them with
corresponding 3D operations.
Acknowledgment
The work is funded by the National Science Centre in
Poland (grant number: 2015/19/B/ST8/02773).
References
[1]	Chaniecki, Z., Grudzien, K., Romanowski, A.: TomograPhic
Visualization of Dynamic Industrial Solid Transporting and Storage
Systems. In: Computer Vision in Robotics and Industrial
Applications. pp. 257-280 (2014)
[2]	Schulze, D.: Silo design for flow. In: Powders and Bulk Solids:
Behavior, Characterization, Storage and Flow. pp. 291-319 (2007)
[3]	Drescher, A.: On the criteria for mass flow in hoppers. Powder
Technol. 73, 251-260 (1992)
[4]	Pudasaini, S.P., K., H.: Avalanche Dynamics: Dynamics of Rapid
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
Flows of Dense Granular Avalanches. Springer, New York. (2007)
Babout, L., Grudzien, K., Maire, E., Withers, P.J.: Influence of wall
roughness and packing density on stagnant zone formation during
funnel flow discharge from a silo: An X-ray imaging study. Chem.
Eng. Sci. 97, 210-224 (2013)
Brown, C.J., Nielsen, J.: Silos: Fundamentals of Theory, Behavior,
and Design. In: E & FN Spon, London. , London (1998)
Grudzien, K., Niedostatkiewicz, M., Adrien, J., Tejchman, J., Maire,
E.: Quantitative estimation of volume changes of granular materials
during silo flow using X-ray tomography. Chem. Eng. Process.
Process Intensif. 50, 59-67 (2011).
Grudzien, K., Niedostatkiewicz, M., Adrien, J., Maire, E., Babout,
L.: Analysis of the bulk solid flow during gravitational silo emptying
using X-ray and ECT tomography. Powder Technol. 224, 196-208
(2012)
Slominski, C., Niedostatkiewicz, M., Tejchman, J.: Application of
particle image velocimetry (PIV) for deformation measurement
during granular silo flow. Powder Technol. 173, 1-18 (2007).
Steingart, D.A., Evans, J.W.: Measurements of granular flows in
two-dimensional hoppers by particle image velocimetry. Part I:
experimental method and results. Chem. Eng. Sci. 60, 1043-1051
(2005).
Grudzien, K., Chaniecki, Z., Romanowski, A., Niedostatkiewicz, M.,
Sankowski, D.: ECT image analysis methods for shear zone
measurements during silo discharging process. Chinese J. Chem.
Eng. 20, 337-345 (2012)
Niedostatkiewicz, M., Tejchman, J., Chaniecki, Z., Grudzien, K.:
Determination of bulk solid concentration changes during granular
flow in a model silo with ECT sensors. Chem. Eng. Sci. 64, 20-30
(2009). doi:10.1016/J.CES.2008.08.035
Chaniecki, Z., Dyakowski, T., Niedostatkiewicz, M., Sankowski, D.:
Application of Electrical Capacitance Tomography for Bulk Solids
Flow Analysis in Silos. Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 23, 306-312 (2006).
Grudzien, Krzysztof Sankowski, D.: Methods for monitoring
gravitational flow in silos using tomography image processing.
IAPGOg. 7, 24-29 (2017). doi:DOI: 10.5604/01.3001.0010.4577
Stasiak, M., Sikora, J., Filipowicz, S., Nita, K.: Principal component
analysis and artificial neural network approach to electrical
impedance tomography problems approximated by multi-region
boundary element method. Eng. Anal. Bound. Elem. 31, 713-720
(2007)
Rymarczyk, T., KIoSowski, G., Cieplak, T., KoZiowski, E.: Industrial
processes control with the use of a neural tomographic algorithm.
Prz. ELEKTROTECHNICZNY. R. 95 NR 2, (2019)
Kiosowski, G., Rymarczyk, T.: Using neural networks and deep
learning algorithms in electrical impedance tomography. IAPGOg. 3,
99-102 (2017)
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-Net: Convolutional
Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. In: Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). pp.
234-241. Springer (2015)
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (2014)
iew publication