Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Keyword Spotter Model for Crop Pest and Dis-
ease Monitoring from Community Radio Data
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
In societies with well developed internet infrastructure, social media is the leading
medium of communication for various social issues especially for breaking news
situations. In rural Uganda however, public community radio is still a dominant
means for news dissemination. Community radio gives audience to the general
public especially to individuals living in rural areas, and thus plays an important
role in giving a voice to those living in the broadcast area. It is an avenue for
participatory communication and a tool relevant in both economic and social
development.This is supported by the rise to ubiquity of mobile phones providing
access to phone-in or text-in talk shows. In this paper, we describe an approach to
analysing the readily available community radio data with machine learning-based
speech keyword spotting techniques. We identify the keywords of interest related to
agriculture and build models to automatically identify these keywords from audio
streams. Our contribution through these techniques is a cost-efficient and effective
way to monitor food security concerns particularly in rural areas. Through keyword
spotting and radio talk show analysis, issues such as crop diseases, pests, drought
and famine can be captured and fed into an early warning system for stakeholders
and policy makers.
1	Introduction
Ensuring a functional and near real-time system of surveillance for crop diseases and pests is of critical
importance to sustaining the livelihoods of smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa (Mutembesa
et al., 2018). Disease and pest surveillance systems have to be put in place to provide early warning
to the farmers and the relevant agricultural research bodies. Usually, when a crop disease or pest is
reported in a given area, experts from the respective research institutes take time to reach the reported
location to carry out investigations. This usually involves inspection of the crops at specific intervals
(of about 10 km) along the more accessible main roads, covering only small proportions of the areas
of interest in major districts (Mutembesa et al., 2018). Because the surveillance teams have to work
within limited budgets, the surveys and the results from the surveys may be delayed or fewer regions
may be sampled in a particular year. As the health experts provide an annual snapshot of the health of
crops across the country they are limited in their ability to provide real-time actionable surveillance
data. In many cases, the farmers never get to know the disease that has attacked their crops for weeks
or even months.
In many areas in Uganda, the vast majority of the affected people will use social media to communicate
their concerns in their local communities. This social media is not Facebook or Twitter, its the local
community radio stations existing in almost each village in sub-Saharan Africa (Saeb et al., 2017).
These rural radio stations give farmers an opportunity to interact with each other and also with
the relevant agricultural authorities such as extension workers and agricultural experts. This can
usually be through a number of formats like phone-in programs, live talk shows (Nakabugu, 2001).
Specifically for some of the radio stations, they have targeted agricultural talk shows that can host
an expert from an agricultural research institute who can aim at providing specific information for
example: about crop disease and pest management.
Keyword Spotting systems (KWS) is a classification task that aims at detection and retrieving of a
series of words from a database of audio streams. The advantage of using a KWS is that unlike full
automatic speech recognition systems, they can be developed without sufficient labelled data. This
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
is common especially in low resourced languages Menon et al. (2019). In this paper, we discuss an
implementation of a Keyword Spotting model that we use to mine local community radio content
using specific keywords for a low resourced language in Uganda. We evaluate our approach on the
Luganda language which is a low-resource language that is currently spoken and used in many of the
Agricultural communities in Uganda.
2	Related Work
Previous work investigating crop disease surveillance utilizes different approaches. Some approaches
have focused on setting up a crop disease surveillance network that relies on the use of mobile
phones Mutembesa et al. (2018; 2019) while others use satellite imagery Zhang et al. (2014). The
disease detection aspect of the surveillance module uses computer vision and machine learning to
detect plant diseases based on leaf imaging Aduwo et al. (2010); Mwebaze & Owomugisha (2016).
Leaf-based approaches however rely on the use of imaging device for low-resource approaches
utilizing smartphones Quinn et al. (2011); Quinn (2013); Mutembesa et al. (2018; 2019). This may
be limited in areas with no or low smartphone adoption.
Keyword spotting for low resource languages has been implemented before Menon et al. (2017);
Saeb et al. (2017). The approaches include used include CNNs, siamese CNNs Bromley et al. (1994)
and autoencoders. Other models are designed for low computational resources such as Tang & Lin
(2018) Coucke et al. (2019) due to the popularity of using keyword spotting to identify commands in
smartphones, battery concerns from CPU requirements comes into play. Low resource languages
pose a problem as models that consume a lot of data in training fail to converge due to low volume of
text corpora and speech recording.
Luganda is an almost zero-resource Bantu language, spoken in the central region of Uganda. Work on
Luganda remains small compared to larger languages such as Kiwahili, Zulu and Hausa. Research on
Luganda exists in machine translation Nandutu (2016), keyword spotting Menon et al. (2017); Saeb
et al. (2017). Prior work on Luganda keyword spotting and radio monitoring of Luganda community
radio has been initiated by Menon et al. (2017); Saeb et al. (2017) to generate insights concerning
humanitarian aid and development. While radio content is publicly available and accessible with
seemingly no data/privacy restrictions, there have been few interventions seeking to mine this data
for surveillance purposes particularly for crop pests and diseases.
3	Methodology
3.1	Building the Keyword Corpus
The primary source of keywords in this study are radio recordings captured from radio stations spread
across Uganda. We selected 55 radio stations which are commonly listened to in the central region.
For each radio station, a google search was done to find out whether it had an online radio station
and whether it had its radio schedule available online. From the initial list of radio stations, 19 of
them had online streams and of these at least 14 radios broadcast in Luganda. We identified radio
schedules for 10 of these radio stations from the radio station websites and also by manually listening
in to the stations. The purpose was to identify the time when there are talk shows particularly the
agricultural ones. It was observed that for most talk shows topics of discussions are picked depending
on the audience demand, the trending topic in the society or country, sponsors/advertisers or specific
campaigns though still there are weekly talk shows which are focused on agriculture. The purpose
was to identify the time when the talk shows were hired particularly the agricultural ones.
A python script was written to stream the online stations at identified time. These were recorded as 5
minute audio clips which were stored in a shared Dropbox folder. The team also identified 2 radio
stations which avail their radio content online for the past 7 days as 1-hour recordings. The websites
were scrapped and the audio recordings were sorted depending on whether the 1 hour was a talk show
or not. Then the identified 1-hour audio clips that had talk shows were trimmed into 5 minute audio
clips and these were added to the shared Dropbox folder.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: Aggregated Keywords from a sample radio talkshow on the fall army worm pest.
Sample Keywords		Frequency (per recording)
Keyword	Description	
Akasanyi	Luganda term meaning worms	18 times
Obutunda	Luganda term meaning passion fruits	22 times
Kasooli	Luganda word meaning maize	35 times
The 5-minute audio clips were then played back and carefully listened to by a team of five volunteers
with the purpose of identifying and extracting the commonly used agricultural terms that would be
fed into the keyword spotting model.
To compliment the keywords captured from radio talkshows, we also scrapped an online local
newspaper. For example, we obtained articles from a popular newspaper in Uganda commonly known
as Bukedde1. One advantage of using online articles as a source of keywords is that there are different
ways in which the same crop disease or pest is mentioned and the spelling of such words can be to is
captured specifically for Luganda. The keywords were then grouped into crops, diseases, fertilizers,
herbicides and general keywords. Translations were also added in 2 languages that is Luganda and
English as well as an alternative keyword in form of a stem and this was in case the stem alone was a
unique keyword. (give example of keywords with the stemming).
Both the keyword sets from the local radio and online sources were then aggregated into one keyword
corpus of 193 keywords. An example of keywords extracted from a radio talkshow on the Fall Army
Worm pest affecting maize is shown in Table 1.
3.2	Speech Keyword Dataset
Audio data collection was performed by crowdsourcing speech utterances of the different words from
the keyword list. The use of studio captured samples seemed unrealistic, to mimic real-world settings
the data was collected in a natural setting with noisy environments, poor quality recording equipment,
and people talking in a natural, chatty way. Rather than using high quality microphones, and in a
formal setting. This was ensured through the audio data collection tool derived from Warden (2017)
where the person speaking out the words can do it using their phone or laptop wherever they are. In
this study, we collected data from over 35 users who recorded the keywords in Luganda and English.
An important goal here was to record sufficient data to train the model but low enough to allow for
low-resource training. We ensured that we averaged 10 utterances per keyword. Keyword spotting
models are much more useful if they are speaker independent, since the process of personalizing a
model to an individual requires an intrusive user interface experience. With this in mind, the recording
process had to be quick and easy to use, to reduce the number of people who would fail to complete
it. The collected keyword audio data was encoded in ogg vorbis format.
3.3	Data Preprocessing
3.3.1	1D CNN
In order to perform speech processing, our first step is to convert the recorded ogg keyword files to
wav files. As ogg is a lossy encoding format, we used ffmpeg ffm to decode the ogg vorbis files into
wav audio files. The files were then transformed into 1d vectors using librosa McFee et al. (2019).
Then for an audio signal wst with a sampling rate s and a length t. We use the McFee et al. (2019)
resampling feature below to normalize the sampling rate of all the samples to 8kHz as shown in
Equation 1.
fre : wst → w8kH zt	(1)
1https://www.bukedde.co.ug
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
3.3.2	SIAMESE CNN
For the Siamese CNN we transform the ogg files into wav using ffmpeg ffm. Then we proceed to
generate spectograms and apply mel-compression.
4	Model Architecture and Design
In this section, we briefly discuss the keyword spotting approaches that we use in this paper.
4.1	1D Convolution model
In this study, We use a 1-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) which takes in as input
the processed raw audio data. The input to the model is an array representing the audio waveform
(X). The network is designed to learn the set of parameters (θ) to map the input to a prediction (T)
according to a hierarchical feature extraction given by equation 3.
T = F(X∣Θ) = fL(…f2(f1(X ∣Θ1)∣Θ2)∣ΘL)
(2)
where L is the number of hidden layers in the network.
The final architecture created is a 14-layer deep neural network with five 1D convolutional layers
each with intermediate pooling layers. A dropout of 0.5 was also applied after the two successive
dense layers. The final layer is a softmax activation function to map to only 10 target keywords
selected randomly from the Luganda/English corpus. The model was trained using batch gradient
descent with the Adam Optimizer and a learning rate of 0.001.
4.2	Siamese CNN
The siamese CNN Bromley et al. (1994) takes as an input two mel-spectograms of size 32x100.
We generate inputs to the CNN by pairing mel-compressed spectograms of the same word and
mel-compressed spectograms of different keywords. The inputs can be ‘similar‘ being pronunciations
of the same word or ”different” being pronunciations of different words.
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
figureSiamese convolutional model
The siamese model performs binary classification at the output, classifying if the inputs are similar or
not based on an L1 distance metric. Binary cross-entropy was used as a loss function to achieve this
task 3.
- (y log(p) + (1 - y)log(1 -p))	(3)
5	Results and Discussion
As a baseline experiment we trained a baseline 5-layer densely connected network and our 1d
convolutional model. We trained the model with early stopping at no improvement in validation loss
for 10 epochs, model stopped at 30 epochs. We trained our model on a total of 18426 samples and
validated it on 4607 and tested on 5759 samples. This model was trained on a K80 GPU on Google
Colab. The evolution of loss and accuracy are shown in Figure 1. Results are shown in Table 2.
6	Conclusion and Future Direction
Using 1D convolutions for low-resource keyword spotting shows promising results. We aim to
explore the usability of this work with other Bantu languages, specifically those geographically close
to Luganda for example Runyankore, Kinyarwanda and Tooro as well as other linguistically further
but geographically close languages such as Luo and Karamojong. We are also interested in the
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 2: Node C山SSification Prediction ReSUltS
F-1	Model	Accuracy	Average Precision	Average Recall
Dense Baseline	0.62	0.62	0.60	0.60
1d-conv	0.93	0.93	0.93	0.93
Siamese CNN	0.85	0.92	0.75	0.83
Figure 1: Left: Model training and validation accuracy, Right: training and validation loss.
poSSibility of uSing tranSfer learning in keyword Spotting in different dialectS of the Same language aS
in Acholi, Lango and Kumam for Luo and different but linguiStically related languageS aS Luganda
and Runyankore.
References
Ffmpeg. http://www.ffmpeg.org/.
Jennifer R Aduwo, ErneSt Mwebaze, and John A Quinn. Automated viSion-baSed diagnoSiS of
cassava mosaic disease. In Industrial Conference on Data Mining-Workshops, pp. 114-122. New
York, NY, 2010.
Jane Bromley, Isabelle Guyon, Yann LeCun, Eduard Sackinger, and Roopak Shah. Signature
verification using a” siamese” time delay neural network. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 737-744, 1994.
Alice Coucke, Mohammed Chlieh, Thibault Gisselbrecht, David Leroy, Mathieu Poumeyrol, and
Thibaut Lavril. Efficient keyword spotting using dilated convolutions and gating. ICASSP 2019 -
2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), May
2019. doi: 10.1109/icassp.2019.8683474. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/icassp.
2019.8683474.
Brian McFee, Vincent Lostanlen, Matt McVicar, Alexandros Metsai, Stefan Balke, Carl Thom,
Colin Raffel, Dana Lee, Kyungyun Lee, Oriol Nieto, Jack Mason, Frank Zalkow, Dan Ellis,
Eric Battenberg, , Ryuichi Yamamoto, Rachel Bittner, Keunwoo Choi, Josh Moore, Ziyao Wei,
Nullmightybofo, Pius Friesch, Fabian-Robert Stoter, Daro Here,, Thassilo, Taewoon Kim, Matt
Vollrath, Adam Weiss, CJ Carr, and Ajweiss-Dd. librosa/librosa: 0.7.0, 2019. URL https:
//zenodo.org/record/591533.
Raghav Menon, Armin Saeb, Hugh Cameron, William Kibira, John Quinn, and Thomas Niesler.
Radio-browsing for developmental monitoring in uganda. In 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5795-5799. IEEE, 2017.
Raghav Menon, Herman Kamper, Ewald van der Westhuizen, John Quinn, and Thomas Niesler. Fea-
ture exploration for almost zero-resource asr-free keyword spotting using a multilingual bottleneck
extractor and correspondence autoencoders. In INTERSPEECH, 2019.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Daniel Mutembesa, Christopher Omongo, and Ernest Mwebaze. Crowdsourcing real-time viral
disease and pest information: A case of nation-wide cassava disease surveillance in a developing
country. In Sixth AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, 2018.
Daniel Mutembesa, Ernest Mwebaze, Solomon Nsumba, Christopher Omongo, and Humphrey
Mutaasa. Mobile community sensing with smallholder farmers in a developing nation; a scaled
pilot for crop health monitoring. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07047, 2019.
Ernest Mwebaze and Godliver Owomugisha. Machine learning for plant disease incidence and
severity measurements from leaf images. In 2016 15th IEEE International Conference on Machine
Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 158-163. IEEE, 2016.
Sylvia Biraahwa Nakabugu. The role of rural radio in agricultural and rural development translating
agricultural research information into messages for farm audiences. In First International Workshop
on Farm Radio Broadcasting-19-22, 2001.
Irene Nandutu. Luganda text-to-speech machine. Master’s thesis, School of Computing and Engi-
neering, Uganda Technology and Management University, sep 2016.
John Quinn. Computational techniques for crop disease monitoring in the developing world. In Ad-
vances in Intelligent Data Analysis XII, pp. 13-18. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-41398-8.2. URL https://doi.org/10.10 07/97 8-3-64 2-41398-8_2.
John Alexander Quinn, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Ernest Mwebaze. Modeling and monitoring crop
disease in developing countries. In Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.
Armin Saeb, Raghav Menon, Hugh Cameron, William Kibira, John Quinn, and Thomas Niesler.
Very low resource radio browsing for agile developmental and humanitarian monitoring. In
INTERSPEECH, pp. 2118-2122, 2017.
Raphael Tang and Jimmy Lin. Deep residual learning for small-footprint keyword spotting. 2018
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Apr 2018.
doi: 10.1109/icassp.2018.8462688. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/icassp.2018.
8462688.
Pete Warden. Open speech recording. https://github.com/petewarden/
open- speech- recording, 2017.
Jingcheng Zhang, Ruiliang Pu, Lin Yuan, Jihua Wang, Wenjiang Huang, and Guijun Yang. Monitoring
powdery mildew of winter wheat by using moderate resolution multi-temporal satellite imagery.
PloS one, 9(4):e93107, 2014.
7