Figure 1: Dataset, Architecture, and the Breadth-FirSt Search optimum. A maze-testing sample consistsof a maze (I) and an initial hot-spot image (H0). The proposed architecture processes H0 by generating a seriesof hot-spot images (Hi>0) which are of the same dimension as H0 however their pixels are not binary but rathertake on values between 0 (Off, pale-orange) and 1 (On, red). This architecture can represent an optimal solution,wherein the red region in H0 spreads on the black cluster in I to which it belongs. Once the spreading hasexhausted, the Solvable/Unsolvable label is determined by the values of Hn at center (ending point) of the maze.
Figure 2: The three cases for the action of the convolutional-sigmoid layers. These cases are representative ofthe three sets corresponding to all possible states of the binary maze images (I) and the hot-spot images (Hi-1and Hi), with values between 0 (Off, pale-orange) and 1 (On, red).
Figure 3: Dynamics of activations for the checkerboard BFS minima obtained in training. The activationsin H1..3 and H11..13 are shown in (b) and (d), respectively, along with the corresponding maze (a). Superpositionof the maze on top of H1..3 and H11..13 are shown in (c) and (e), respectively. See also a short movie with thecheckerboard activations at https://youtu.be/t-_TDkt3ER4.
Figure 4: Activation dynamics for weights close to the optimal solution (λ = λc - 0.227). Up to layer19 (H19 ) the On activations spread according to BFS however at H20 a very faint localized unwanted Onactivation begins to develop (a bug) and quickly saturates (H23). Past this point BFS dynamics continuesnormally but spreads both the original and the unwanted On activations. While not shown explicitly, Onactivations still appear only on black maze cells. Notably the bug developed in rather large black region ascan be deduced from the large red region in its origin. See also a short movie showing the occurrence of thisbug at https://youtu.be/2I436BVAVdM and more bugs at https://youtu.be/kh-AfOo4TkU.
Figure 5: Logarithm of the numerically obtained err scaled by L-2+5/24 as a function of a deviation (δ) fromthe optimal-BFS weights for two maze sizes along with a fit to Eq. (4). The dotted vertical line marks the end ofthe domain of applicability of Eq. (4).
Figure 6: A numerical experiment showing how our maze classification architecture processes a particularsample consisting a maze (black and white image) and a hot-spot image marking the starting-point (panel (0))when its weights are tuned to the optimal BFS solution. The first layer receives a hot-spot image which is Ononly near the starting-point of the maze H0 ) (panel (0)). This On activation then spreads on the black clustercontaining the start-point in (Hn with n = 1, 2, 4, 8, panels 1,2,4,8 resp.). Notably other region are Off (i.e.
Figure 7: The natural logarithm of an upper bound to α∕β2 as a function of a Paramterization (Y) of a pathleading from the numerically obtained total neglect minima to the checkerboard BFS minima through a randompoint. The three different curves show the max,mean, and median based on a 100 different paths. Notably nopath violated the α β2 constrain in the vicinity of the total neglect minima.
