Figure 1: In Fishery two agents live on opposite sides of a lake and cannot observe each other’sactions directly. Each time step fish can spawn on their side of the lake and begin to swim to the otherside. Fish start young and become mature if they are allowed to enter the middle of the lake. Trainingusing selfish self-play leads to agents that try to eat all the fish and thus cannot reach optimal payoffs,while social training finds cooperative strategies. Panel C shows example trajectories of payoffs aswell as the CCC per-round threshold. Panel D shows trajectories of behavior by CCC agents whenfaced with C or D partners. Panel E shows that CCC does well with itself, is not easily exploited, andincentivizes cooperation from its partners.
Figure 2: In the Pong Player’s Dilemma selfish training leads to agents that try hard to score andthus end up with bad payoffs. Cooperators learn to gently hit the ball back and forth. CCC agentsbehave like a cooperators when faced with cooperators and prevent themselves from being exploitedby defectors. Panel B shows example PPD games between different strategies with brightness of apixel indicating proportion of time ball spends in that location. Panels C and D present comparisonsof strategies in the PPD and Risky PPD. In PPD, CCC achieves similar performance to the moreexpensive amTFT. In the finite length risky PPD, however, CCC loses both its ability to incentivizecooperation and to avoid exploitation.
Figure 3: In Coins two agents, Red and Blue, live on an 8 × 8 grid and move around in all cardinaldirections. Coins randomly appear on the board and each have a color. If an agent picks up (movesover) any coin, they receive one point. However, if they pick up a coin of the other agent’s color, thatagent loses 2 points. Selfish agents learn to grab all coins but prosocial agents play the strategy ofonly picking up coins of their own color. We see that CCC agents can avoid exploitation and maintaincooperation with cooperators and other CCC agents.
Figure 4: Tournament result for Fishery, Coins, PPD, and Risky PPD. Each cell shows the averagetotal payoff of an agent playing the row strategy against a partner playing the column strategy.
