Figure 1: Intuitions behind Theorem 3.2.
Figure 2:	The cross Lipschitz constant samples for three images from CIFAR, MNIST and ImageNetdatasets, and their fitted Reverse Weibull distributions with the corresponding MLE estimates oflocation, scale and shape parameters (aW, bW, cW) shown on the top of each plot. The D-statisticsof K-S test and p-values are denoted as ks and pval. With small ks and high p-value, the hypothesizedreverse Weibull distribution fits the empirical distribution of cross Lipschitz constant samples well.
Figure 3:	The percentage of examples whose null hypothesis (the samples S follow a reverse Weibulldistribution) cannot be rejected by K-S test with a significance level of 0.05 for p = 2 and p = ∞.
Figure 4: Comparison of '∞ distortion obtained by CW and I-FGSM attacks, CLEVER score and theslope based Lipschitz constant estimation (SLOPE) by Wood & Zhang (1996). SLOPE significantlyexceeds the distortions found by attacks, thus it is an inappropriate estimation of lower bound βL .
Figure 5:	The empirical CDF of the gap between CLEVER score and the `2 norm of adversarialdistortion generated by CW attack with random targets for 100 images on 3 ImageNet networks.
Figure 6:	Comparison of the CLEVER scores (circle) and the `2 norm of adversarial distortiongenerated by CW attack (triangle) with random targets for 100 images. The x-axis is image ID andthe y-axis is the `2 distortion metric.
Figure 7: Comparison of the CLEVER score calculated by Nb = {50, 100, 250, 500} and the `2norm of adversarial distortion found by CW attack (CW) on 3 ImageNet models and 3 target types.
Figure 8: Illustration of Theorem D.1 with d = 2, q = 2 and U = 3. The three hyperplanesWiX+ bi = 0 divide the space into seven regions (with different colors). The red dash lineencloses the ball B2(X0, R1) and the blue dash line encloses a larger ball B2(X0, R2). Ifwe draw samples uniformly within the balls, the probability of kVg(X)k2 = y is propor-tional to the intersected volumes of the ball and the regions with kVg(X)k2 = y.
Figure 9: Comparison of the CLEVER score calculated by Nb = {50, 100, 250, 500} and the `2norm of adversarial distortion found by CW attack (CW) on MNIST and CIFAR models with 3target types.
