Figure 1: Estimates of distances between the CIFAR-10 train and test sets. Each point is basedon 100 samples, estimating with replacement; sampling without replacement, and/or using the fulltraining set, gives similar results. Lines show means, error bars standard deviations, dark coloredregions a 3 coverage interval of the samples, light colored regions a 95% interval. Note the differingn axes.
Figure 2: Score estimates over the learning process for MNIST training.
Figure 3: Comparison of samples for the 64 × 64 LSUN Bedroom database.
Figure 4: Comparison of samples with a ResNet generator for the 160 × 160 CelebA dataset.
Figure 5: Illustrations of the domains of analyticity for two functions used in deep learning. Panela represents the domains of analyticity for the ReLU function in R2. Each of the four domains D1,D2, D3 and D4 can be described by two inequalities of the form Gk,1(Y ) > 0 and Gk,2(Y) > 0,where k is the index of each domain. Here, Gk,1(Y ) = ±Y1 and Gk,2 (Y ) = ±Y2 which are analyticfunctions. Panel b represents the domains of analyticity for the max-pooling function in R2. D1 andD2 are each one described by one inequality of the form Gk,1 (Y ) > 0 with G1,1(Y ) = Y1 - Y2 andG2,1(Y ) = Y2 - Y1, which are both analytic functions.
Figure 6: Gaussian noise; α is the mixture weight of the Gaussian noise.
Figure 7: Gaussian blur; α is the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter.
Figure 8: Black rectangles; α is the portion of the image size each rectangle contains.
Figure 9: Swirl: α is the strength of the swirl effect.
Figure 10: Salt and pepper noise: α is the portion of pixels which are noised.
Figure 11: ImageNet contamination: α is the portion of images replaced by ImageNet samples.
Figure 12: Samples from the models listed in Table 3. Rational-quadratic and Gaussian kernels ob-tain retain sample quality despite reduced discriminator complexity. Each of these models generatesgood quality samples with the standard DCGAN discriminator (critic size 64).
Figure 13: Comparison of samples from various models, as well as true samples from the test set.
