Figure 1: Evidential visualization of structural discontinuity in a latent space with examples ofaffine-MNIST in (a)-(b) and FaShion-MNIST in (c)-(d). In each set, We first generate four imagesat the four corners in blue boxes by randomly sampling four latent variables (z's for DCGAN and(z, c)’s for our memoryGAN). We then generate 64 images by interpolating latent variables betweenthem. In memoryGAN, C is a memory index, and it is meaningless to directly interpolate over c.
Figure 2: The memoryGAN architecture. (a) The memory conditional generative network (MCGN)samples a memory slot index C from a categorical prior distribution over memory slots, and use themean direction of corresponding mixture component Kc as conditional cluster information. (b) Thediscriminative memory network (DMN) consists of an inference network and a memory module.
Figure 3: Some probabilistic interpretations of MemoryGAN. (a) The biased log-likelihood p(x∣y =1) of 10,000 real test images (i.e. unseen for training) according to training epochs. (b) Examplesof posteriors p(c∣x) of nine randomly selected memory slots for a given input image shown at theleft-most column in the red box. (c) The categorical prior distribution p(c) along training iterations.
Figure 4: Image samples generated on (a) CIFAR10, (b) CelebA, and (C) Chairs dataset. Top fourrows show successful examples, while the bottom two show near-miss or failure cases.
Figure 5: Examples of generalization ability of MemoryGAN. For each sample produced by Mem-oryGAN (in the left-most column), the seven nearest training images are shown in the followingcolumns. The generated images and the nearest training images are quite different, which means theMemoryGAN indeed creates novel images rather than memorizing and retrieving training images.
Figure 6: More interpolation examples generated by MemoryGAN. Samples are generated by fixinga discrete latent variable C and sampling 64 continuous latent variable z. Some memory slots containsingle stationary structure as shown in (a) and (d), while other slots contain images of the same class,but variation of styles as shown in (b)-(c) and (e)-(f).
Figure 7: Interpolation examples generated by MemoryGAN on the Chair dataset. Memory slotscontain different shapes, colors and angles of chairs as in (a)-(c). In the failure case (d), there aresome unrealistic chair images as the back of chair rotates from left to right.
