Figure 1: The architecture of the proposed model. The perceptual model computes the likelihood of thecurrent observation in all possible locations. The belief of agent’s location is propagated through time by takingelement-wise dot-product with the likelihood. The policy model learns a policy to localize accurately whileminimizing the number of steps required for localization. See text for more details.
Figure 2: The map design, agent’s observation and the corresponding likelihood maps in different domains. In2D domains, agent’s observation is the pixels in front of the agent until the first obstacle. In the 3D domain, theagent’s observation is the image showing the first-person view of the world as seen by the agent.
Figure 3: Different experiments in the 3D Environments. Refer to the text for more details.
Figure 4: An example of the policy execution and belief propagation in the Maze3D Environment. The rowsshows consecutive time steps in a episode. The columns show Agent’s observation, the belief of its locationbefore and after making the observation, the map design and agent’s perspective of the world. Agent’s truelocation is also marked in the map design (not visible to the agent). Belief maps show the probability of beingat a particular location. Darker shades imply higher probability. The belief of its orientation and agent’s trueorientation are also highlighted by colors. For example, the Red belief map shows the probability of agent facingeast direction at each x-y coordinate. Note that map design is not a part of the Belief Maps, it is overlayed on theBelief Maps for better visualization. At all time steps, all locations which look similar to agent’s perspectivehave high probabilities in the belief map. The example shows the importance deciding actions while localizing.
Figure 5: Figure showing the architecture of the perceptual model in 3D Environments.
Figure 6: Figure showing the architecture of the policy model in 3D Environments.
Figure 7: Sample output of the transition function (fT) given previous belief and action taken by the agent. Themap design is shown in the left.
