Figure 1: Memory-Bank representations of ResNet, DenseNet, and FractalNet blocks.
Figure 2: (a) Structure of one op: A 1x1 Conv operating on the memory banks, followed by UP to 2parallel paths of 2 convolutions each. (b) Basic network skeleton.
Figure 3: An unrolled graph, its equivalent memory-bank representation, and its encoded embedding.
Figure 4: True error and SMASH validation error for 50 different random architectures on CIFAR-100.
Figure 5: (a) SMASH correlation with a crippled HyperNet. Error bars represent 1 standard deviation.
Figure 6:	A simplified version of our best-found SMASHv2 architecture from CIFAR-100 with thehighest SMASH score. N represents number of output units, op which convolutions are active, groupsconvolution groups, ks kernel size, and d dilation.
Figure 7:	A simplified version of our best-found SMASHv1 architecture. N represents number ofoutput units, and d represents the dilation factor for the 3x3 filter.
Figure 8: An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the first block of our best SMASHv2net.
Figure 9:	An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the second block of our bestSMASHv1 net.
Figure 10:	An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the final block of our bestSMASHv2 net. Floating paths are an artifact of the graph generation process, and are actuallyattached to the nearest rectangular node.
Figure 11:	An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the first block of our best SMASHVInet. Floating paths are an artifact of the graph generation process, and are actually attached to thenearest rectangular node.
Figure 12: An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the second block of our bestSMASHVI net. Floating paths are an artifact of the graph generation process, and are actuallyattached to the nearest rectangular node.
Figure 13: An expanded (though still partially simplified) view of the final block of our best SMASHv1net. Floating paths are an artifact of the graph generation process, and are actually attached to thenearest rectangular node.
