Figure 1: Samples generated by our model GMV on the 3DChairs and on the CelebA datasets. Allimages in a row have been generated with the same content vector, and all images in a column havebeen generated with the same view vector.
Figure 2: Overview of the GMV model. The generator G produces an image given a content vectorC and view vector v. A pair of images is generated by sampling a common content factor C 〜 Pcbut two different views factors vι 〜Pv and v 〜Pv. The discriminator D is learned to distinguishbetween such pairs of generated images and real pairs of samples corresponding to a same objectunder different views. Real pairs are built by choosing at random two training samples of the sameobject. Those samples should most of the time correspond to two different views. No informationon the views is used here.
Figure 3: The conditional generative model C-GMV. Content vectors are not randomly sampledanymore, but are induced from real inputs through an encoder E. The discriminator is providedtwo types of negative examples: examples of the first type are pairs of generated samples using asame content factor but with two different views (left). The second type of negative examples iscomposed of pairs of a real sample x and of a generated sample built from x using a CGAN likeapproach (right). This artificial sample corresponds to the same content as in input sample x butunder a different view. Note that the left part of the architecture is crucial for the model to take intoaccount the view factor, and thus to generate diversity which cannot be obtained using the C-GANcomponent only.
Figure 4: Samples generated by the DCGANx2, DCGANx4 and DCGANx8 models. These sampleshave to be compared to the ones presented in Figure 1.
Figure 5: Samples generated by the GMV model on the MVC Cloth and on the 102flowers datasetsby GMV model. All images in a row have been generated with the same content vector, and allimages in a column have been generated with the same view vector.
Figure 6: Samples generated by the GMV model by using interpolation on the content (left) or onthe view (right) for 3DChairs (up) and CelebA datasets (bottom). Within each of the four boxes,each row is independent of the others. For the two left boxes: The left and right column correspondto generated samples with two sampled content factors, while the middle images correspond to thesamples generated by using linear interpolated content factors between the two extreme content fac-tors while the view factor remains fixed. The two right boxes are built the same way by exchangingthe roles of view and content.
Figure 7: Samples generated by conditional models. The images on the left are generated by C-GMVwhile the images on the right are generated by a single CGAN. The leftmost column correspondsto the input example from which the content factor is extracted, while other columns are imagesgenerated with randomly sampled views.
Figure 8: Samples generated by conditional models: CGMV and CGAN (top), Mathieu et al. (2016)and DCGAN variant (bottom). The figure shows samples generated from four input images (leftmostcolumn) by computing their content factors and by randomly sampling one view factor per column.
Figure 9: Additional results on GMV: All images in a row have been generated with the same contentvector, and all images in a column have been generated with the same view vector18Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Figure 10: Interpolation GMV: The view is shared among each image. Content is interpolated.
Figure 10: Interpolation GMV: The view is shared among each image. Content is interpolated.
Figure 11: Additional interpolation on GMV: Each block is generated with the same content vector.
Figure 12: Additional results on C-GMV on the MVC cloth dataset21Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Figure 13: Additional results on C-GMV on the 3d chairs dataset22Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Attribute	CGAN	GANx2	GANx4	GANx8	Mathieu et al.	Mathieu et al. (DC- GAN)	GMV	CGMV	CelebA	Real Dist.
Figure 13: Additional results on C-GMV on the 3d chairs dataset22Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Attribute	CGAN	GANx2	GANx4	GANx8	Mathieu et al.	Mathieu et al. (DC- GAN)	GMV	CGMV	CelebA	Real Dist.
