Figure 1: Early aborts in gridworld.
Figure 3: Early abort threshold: In our didactic example, increasing the early abort threshold causesmore cautious exploration (left) without severely increasing the number of steps to solve (right).
Figure 5: We compare our method to a non-episodic (“forward-only”) approach on ballin cup. Although neither uses hard resets,only our method learns to catch the ball. Asan upper bound, we also show the “statusquo” approach that performs a hard resetafter episode, which is often impractical out-side simulation.
Figure 6: Our method achieves equal or better rewards than the status quo with fewer manual resets.
Figure 7: Early abort threshold: Increasing the early abort threshold to act more cautiously avoidsmany hard resets, indicating that early aborts help avoid irreversible states.
Figure 8: Reset attempts: Increasing the number of reset attempts reduces hard resets. Allowing toomany reset attempts reduces reward for the pusher environment.
Figure 9: Increasing ensemble sizeboosts policy reward while decreasingrate of hard resets.
Figure 10: Our method automatically in-duces a curriculum, allowing the agent tosolve peg insertion with sparse rewards.
Figure 11: Combining value functions: We compare three methods for ensembling value functionson gridworld. Missing points for the red and green lines indicate that pessimistic and realistic methodfail to solve the task for larger values of Qmin .
Figure 12: Combining value functions: For continuous environments, the method for combing valuefunctions has little effect.
Figure 13: Training dynamics: We show the number of steps taken before an early abort for cliffcheetah (top row), cliff walker (middle row), and pusher (bottom row). Increasing the safety thresholdcauses early aborts to occur earlier, causing the agent to explore more cautiously. These plots are theaverage across 5 random seeds.
Figure 14:	Experiment from § 6.2E.2 Do Early Aborts avoid Hard Resets Plots? - More PlotsThis experiment, described in section 6.3, shows the effect of varying the early abort threshold.
Figure 15:	Experiment from § 6.3E.3 Multiple Reset Attempts - MORE PlotsThis experiment, described in Section 6.4, shows the effect of increasing the number of reset attempts.
Figure 16: Experiment from § 6.4(c) Pusher16Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018E.4 Ensembles ARE Safer - MORE PlotsThis experiment, described in Section 6.5, shows the effect of increasing the number of reset attempts.
Figure 17: Experiment from § 6.5F	Experimental DetailsF.1 Gridworld ExperimentsTo generate Figures 1 and 2, we averaged early abort counts across 10 random seeds. For Figure 3we took the median result across 10 random seeds. Both gridworld experiments used 5 models in theensemble.
