Figure 1: In the GAN context for example in text generation, we have to match a (smoothed) discretereal distribution and a continuous generator. In this case, the CDF matching enabled by SobolevIPM gives non zero discrepancy between a (smoothed) discrete and a continuous density even if thedensities have disjoint supports. This ensures non vanishing gradients of the critic.
Figure 2: Numerical solution of the PDE satisfied by the optimal Sobolev critic and the transporta-tion Plan induced by the gradient of Sobolev critic. The gradient of the critic (wrt to the input),defines on the support of μ = P+2Q a transportation plan for moving the distribution mass from Qto P. For a theoretical analysis of this transportation plan and its relation to Fokker-Planck diffusionthe reader is invited to check Appendix A.
Figure 3: Result of Sobolev GAN for various dominating measure μ, for resnets as architectures ofthe critic and the generator.
Figure 4: Fisher GAN with different architectures for critics: (a-c) We see that for μ = μGP andG = Resnet for various critic architectures, Fisher GAN fails at the task of text generation. Wenotice small improvements for RNN critics (b-c) due to the conditioning and factoring of the dis-tribution. (d) Fisher GAN with recurrent generator and critic, trained on a curriculum conditioningfor increasing lengths `, increments indicated by gridlines. In this curriculum conditioning setup,with recurrent critics and generators, the training of Fisher GAN succeeds and reaches similar levelsof Sobolev GAN (and WGAN-GP). It is important to note that by doing this explicit curriculumconditioning for Fisher GAN, we highlight the implicit conditioning induced by Sobolev GAN, viathe gradient regularizer.
Figure 5: “K+1” parametrization of the critic for semi-supervised learning.
Figure 6: Comparison of annealed versus non annealed smoothing of Pr in Sobolev GAN. We seethat annealed smoothing outperforms the non annealed smoothing experiments.
Figure 7:	Result of WGAN-GP and Sobolev with RNNs.
Figure 8:	Text samples from various GANs considered in this paper.
