Figure 1: Spatial correlation is dominated by roadnetwork structure. (1) Traffic speed in road 1 aresimilar to road 2 as they locate in the same highway.
Figure 2: System architecture for the Diffusion Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network designedfor spatiotemporal traffic forecasting. The historical time series are fed into an encoder whose finalstates are used to initialize the decoder. The decoder makes predictions based on either previousground truth or the model output.
Figure 3: Learning curve for DCRNN andDCRNN without diffusion convolution. Remov-ing diffusion convolution results in much highervalidation error. Moreover, DCRNN with bi-directional random walk achieves the lowest val-idation error.
Figure 4: Effects of K and the number of unitsin each layer of DCRNN. K corresponds to thereception field width of the filter, and the numberof units corresponds to the number of filters.
Figure 5: Performance comparison for dif-ferent DCRNN variants. DCRNN, with thesequence to sequence framework and SChed-uled sampling, achieves the lowest MAE onthe validation dataset. The advantage be-comes more clear with the increase of theforecasting horizon.
Figure 6: Traffic time series forecasting visualization.
Figure 7: Visualization of learned localized filters centered at different nodes with K = 3 on theMETR-LA dataset. The star denotes the center, and the colors represent the weights. We observe thatweights are localized around the center, and diffuse alongside the road network.
Figure 8: Sensor distribution of the METR-LA and PEMS-BAY dataset.
Figure 9: Sensor correlations between the center sensor and its neighborhoods for different forecastinghorizons. The correlations are estimated using regularized VAR. We observe that the correlations arelocalized and closer neighborhoods usually have larger relevance, and the magnitude of correlationquickly decay with the increase of distance which is consistent with the diffusion process on thegraph.
Figure 11: Traffic time series forecasting visualization.
