Figure 1: A navigation agent equipped with semi-parametric topological memory (SPTM). Giventhe inputs - the current observation o and the goal observation og - SPTM provides a waypointobservation ow . This waypoint and the current observation o are fed into the locomotion networkL, which outputs the action a to be executed in the environment.
Figure 2: The use of semi-parametric topological memory for navigation. (a) The retrieval networkR localizes in the graph the vertices va (blue) and vg (orange), corresponding to the current agent’sobservation o and the goal observation og , respectively. (b) The shortest path on the graph betweenthese vertices is computed (red arrows). (c) The waypoint vertex vw (yellow) is selected as the vertexin the shortest path that is furthest from the agent’s vertex va but can still be confidently reached bythe agent. The output of the SPTM is the corresponding waypoint observation ow = ovw .
Figure 3: SPTM-based agent navigating towards a goal in a three-dimensional maze (a). The agentaims to reach the goal, denoted by a star. Given the current agent’s observation (b) and the goalobservation (d), SPTM produces a waypoint observation (c). The locomotion network is then usedto navigate towards the waypoint.
Figure 4: Layouts of training and test mazes.
Figure 5: Percentage of successful navigation trials as a function of trial duration. Higher is better.
Figure 6: A walkthrough trajectory (left) and three goal-directed navigation tracks in the Val-3 maze(right). In the walkthrough trajectory, the shortcuts automatically found in the SPTM graph areshown in red. Goal-directed navigation trials shown in Tracks 1, 2, and 3 were all successful, butTrack 3 was excessively long. Start positions are shown in green, goals in red.
Figure S1:	Layouts of the mazes used for validation.
Figure S2:	Percentage of successful navigation trials as a function of trial duration, in the validationmazes. Higher is better.
Figure S3:	Graphs constructed using per pixel matching. Shortcut connections are shown in red.
