Table 1: Test error rates on CIFAR-10and CIFAR-100 datasets.
Table 2: Distinguishing in- and out-of-distribution test set data for image classification. All values arepercentages. ↑ indicates larger value is better, and ] indicates lower value is better. All parameter settings areshown in Appendix A.2. Additional results on WRN-40-4 and MNIST dataset are reported in Appendix A.1.
Table 3: Distinguishing in- and out-of-distribution test set data for image classification. All values arepercentages. ↑ indicates larger value is better, and J indicates lower value is better.
Table 4: Optimal perturbation magnitude ε for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 5: Optimal Temperature T for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 6: Optimal perturbation magnitude ε for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 7: Optimal Temperature T for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 8: Optimal perturbation magnitude ε for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 9: Optimal Temperature T for reproducing main results in Table 2 and 3.
Table 10: Detection performance across different datasets. Each row corresponds to the FPR atTPR 95% on the same test set where parameters are tuned under different tuning sets. Each columncorresponds to the FPR at TPR 95% on different test sets where parameters are tuned under the sametuning set. The DenseNet is trained on CIFAR-10.
Table 11: Detection performance across different datasets. Each row corresponds to the FPR atTPR 95% on the same test set where parameters are tuned under different tuning sets. Each columncorresponds to the FPR at TPR 95% on different test sets where parameters are tuned under the sametuning set. The Wide-ResNet is trained on CIFAR-10.
Table 12: Distinguishing in- and out-of-distribution test set data for image classification. All values arepercentages. ↑ indicates larger value is better, and J indicates lower value is better. The architecture is DenseNetCIFAR-80 and CIFAR-20 can help explain that the detection task becomes harder when in- andout-of-distribution datasets locate on the same manifold.
