Table 1: Quantitative results for various models on the CNN/Daily Mail test datasetModel		ROUGE-1	ROUGE-2	ROUGE-LML, no intra-attention, no trigram avoidance	"42.85	26.22	19:09ML, no intra-attention	44.26	27.43	40.41ML, with intra-attention	43.86	27.10	40.11RL, no intra-attention	■47:22	"30.51	T3.27ML+RL, no intra-attention	47.03	30.72	43.10Table 2: Quantitative results for various models on the New York Times test datasetSource documentJenson Button was denied his 100th race for McLaren after an ERS prevented him from making it to the Start-line. It capped a miserable weekend for the Briton; his time in Bahrain plagued by reliability issues. Buttonspent much of the race on Twitter delivering his verdict as the action unfolded. ’Kimi is the man to watch,’ and’loving the sparks’, were among his pearls of wisdom, but the tweet which courted the most attention was arather mischievous one: ’Ooh is Lewis backing his team mate into Vettel?’ he quizzed after Rosberg accusedHamilton of pulling off such a manoeuvre in China. Jenson Button waves to the crowd ahead of the BahrainGrand Prix which he failed to start Perhaps a career in the media beckons... Lewis Hamilton has out-qualifiedand finished ahead of Nico Rosberg at every race this season. Indeed Rosberg has now beaten his Mercedesteam-mate only once in the 11 races since the pair infamously collided in Belgium last year. Hamilton securedthe 36th win of his career in Bahrain and his 21st from pole position. Only Michael Schumacher (40), AyrtonSenna (29) and Sebastian Vettel (27) have more. (...)
Table 2: Quantitative results for various models on the New York Times test datasetSource documentJenson Button was denied his 100th race for McLaren after an ERS prevented him from making it to the Start-line. It capped a miserable weekend for the Briton; his time in Bahrain plagued by reliability issues. Buttonspent much of the race on Twitter delivering his verdict as the action unfolded. ’Kimi is the man to watch,’ and’loving the sparks’, were among his pearls of wisdom, but the tweet which courted the most attention was arather mischievous one: ’Ooh is Lewis backing his team mate into Vettel?’ he quizzed after Rosberg accusedHamilton of pulling off such a manoeuvre in China. Jenson Button waves to the crowd ahead of the BahrainGrand Prix which he failed to start Perhaps a career in the media beckons... Lewis Hamilton has out-qualifiedand finished ahead of Nico Rosberg at every race this season. Indeed Rosberg has now beaten his Mercedesteam-mate only once in the 11 races since the pair infamously collided in Belgium last year. Hamilton securedthe 36th win of his career in Bahrain and his 21st from pole position. Only Michael Schumacher (40), AyrtonSenna (29) and Sebastian Vettel (27) have more. (...)Ground truth summaryButton denied 100th race start for McLaren after ERS failure. Button then spent much of the Bahrain GrandPrix on Twitter delivering his verdict on the action as it unfolded. Lewis Hamilton has out-qualified and finishedahead of Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg at every race this season. Bernie Ecclestone confirms F1 will makeits bow in Azerbaijan next season.
Table 3: Example from the CNN/Daily Mail test dataset showing the outputs of our three best modelsafter de-tokenization, re-capitalization, replacing anonymized entities, and replacing numbers. TheROUGE score corresponds to the specific example.
Table 4: Comparison of ROUGE recall scores for lead baselines, the extractive model of Durrettet al. (2016) and our model on their NYT dataset splits.
Table 5: Comparison of human readability scores on a random subset of the CNN/Daily Mail testdataset. All models are with intra-decoder attention.
