Table 1: Result of the corpus-based evaluation. p(ν) or p(θ) means the model samples from agaussian prior, while P(V|u) or p(θ∣u) means the model samples from a Gaussian conditional dis-tribution. +A indicates the model is trained with KL annealing, while +V means the model has alarger stop-word vocabulary (500).
Table 2: Quality assessment. Both metrics were rated from 1 to 5. The numbers inside the bracketsare computed by averaging the mean of the generated responses across prompts, while the onesoutside the brackets are the average of the maximum scores across prompts.
Table 3: Pairwise preference assessment. Note the numbers are the percentage of wins when com-paring models in the first column with the ones in first row. *p < 0.05pected (2.65%< 20%5). This echoes the generic response problem mentioned in previous works (Liet al., 2016a; Serban et al., 2016b). The second block demonstrates the result of the latent variableconversational models. As can be seen, neither sampling from a prior (LV-S2S, p(ν)) nor a condi-tional (LV-S2S, P(V|u)) helps to beat the performance of the seq2seq model. Although both modelsperform equally well in terms of perplexity and lowerbound, the likewise low uniqueness scores asseq2seq indicate that both of their latent variables collapse into a single mode and do not encodemuch information. This was also observed in Zhao et al. 2017 when training seq2seq-based latentvariable models. The KL annealed model LV-S2S, p(ν∣u), +A, as suggested by Bowman et al. 2015,can help to mitigate this problem and achieve a much higher uniqueness score (42.6%).
Table 4: Example comparisons of the three models: S2S-greedy, LV-S2S, P(V|u), +A, and LTCM,p(θ∣u). The result is produced by removing duplicated sentences from the five generated responses.
Table 5: Extended examples of Table 4. The result is produced by removing duplicated sentencesfrom the five generated responses. Each * indicates the beginning of a response.
Table 6: Extended examples of Table 4. The result is produced by removing duplicated sentencesfrom the five generated responses. Each * indicates the beginning of a response.
