Table 1: Performance of 4 backdoor defense methods against 6 backdoor attacks evaluated usingthe attack success rate (ASR) and the classification accuracy (ACC). The deviation indicates the %changes in ASR/ACC compared to the baseline (i.e. no defense). The experiments for Refool weredone on GTSRB, while all other experiments were done on CIFAR-10. The best results are in bold.
Table 2: Effectiveness of our NAD with different teacher architectures against BadNets on CIFAR-10. ASR: attack success rate; ACC: clean accuracy. The first column highlights the architecturaldifference between the teacher and the student network. The best results are boldfaced.
Table 3: A configuration summary for the 6 backdoor attacks: datasets, models, and triggers.
Table 4: Comparison With Mixup and Cutout on erasing backdoor triggers.
Table 5: Performance of MCR with different endpoint models on CIFAR-10 dataset. B denotes thebackdoored WRN-16-1 and F-B denotes the backdoored WRN-16-1 after Fine-tuning. MCR-(B,B)denotes the default setting where the two endpoint models are both B, while MCR-(B,F-B) denotesthe MCR using two different endpoint models B and F-B. The best results are boldfaced.
Table 6: Comparison between NAD and retraining-based approaches that use both the original trig-ger (Org-T) and the MESA-recovered trigger (Rec-T). While all methods are able to reduce the ASRof BadNets to a similar level, NAD is able to reduce the ASR of CL by 16 more percent in compar-ison to the model retrained with the original trigger and by 22 more percent in comparison to themodel retrained with the MESA-generated trigger.
Table 7: Performance of NAD using different attention functions against BadNets on CIFAR-10 with5% clean data. ASR: attack success rate; ACC: clean accuracy. The best results are in boldfaced.
Table 8: NAD using attention map versus activation map against BadNets.
Table 9: Performance of our NAD (β = 2,0000 for α = 1.0 and β = 1,0000 for other α) againstan adaptive BadNets attack. ASR: attack success rate; ACC: clean accuracy. The best results areboldfaced.
