Table 1: The percentage (%) of domain-slot values in dev/test sets covered by training data.
Table 2: Co-occurrence distribution(%) of book people slot with other slots in restaurant domain within thesame user utterance. It rarely co-occurs with particulars slots (e.g., food), which hinders the evaluation of DSTmodels on realistic user utterances such as “I want to book a Chinese restaurant for 8 people.”limitation of the held-out accuracy in reflecting the actual generalization capability of DST models.
Table 3: Human evaluation.
Table 4: Ablation study on the meta operations and classifier based filtering.
Table 5: Joint goal accuracy results on MultiWOZ 2.1 (Eric et al., 2019) of different methods. Theupper part are results of various baselines and lower part are results of TripPy without or with{1,2,4,8} times data augmentation size over original training data. f: results reported from (Zhangetal.,20l9a). §: results reported in their original papers. *: results of our run based on their officiallyreleased code.〒：results need open-domain dialogues and DialoGLUE data.
Table 6: Original test set (Ori-test) and CoCo generated test set (CoCo-test) co-occurrence distribution(%)comparisons of book people slot with other slots in restaurant domain within the same user utterance. Thedistribution entropy of CoCo-test is higher than its counterpart of Ori-test with an upper bound 0.78 corre-sponding to uniform distribution, meaning that CoCo-test is more diverse compared to Ori-test in terms of slotcombinations.
Table 7: Language diversity comparisons of data points between Ori-test and CoCo-test. We useunique n-gram ratio (Li et al., 2016) as our diversity metric. ↑ represents a higher number meansmore diversity. Overall, CoCo-test has similar (if not better) diversity scores compared to Ori-test.
Table 8: Slot-combination dictionary for freq case.
Table 9: Slot-combination dictionary for neu case.
Table 10: Slot-combination dictionary for rare case.
Table 11: Slot value dictionary of train-O.
Table 12: Slot-value dictionary for I case.
Table 13: Slot-value dictionary for O case.
