Table 1: KS Error (in %) for top-1 prediction (with lowest in bold and second lowest underlined)on various image classification datasets and models with different calibration methods. Note, ourmethod consistently reduces calibration error to < 1% in almost all experiments, outperformingstate-of-the-art methods.
Table 2: KS Error (in %) for top-2 prediction (with lowest in bold and second lowest underlined)on various image classification datasets and models with different calibration methods. Again, ourmethod consistently reduces calibration error to < 1% (less then 0.7%, except for one case), in allexperiments, the only one of the methods to achieve this.
Table 3: Dataset splits used for all the calibration experiments. Note, “calibration” set is used for spline fittingin our method and calibration for the baseline methods and then different methods are evaluated on “test” set.
Table 4: Within-top-2 predictions. KS Error (in %) within-top-2 prediction (with lowest in bold and secondlowest underlined) on various image classification datasets and models with different calibration methods. Note,for this experiment we use 14 knots for spline fitting.
Table 5: Classification (top-1) accuracy (with highest in bold and second highest underlined) post calibrationon various image classification datasets and models with different calibration methods. Note, only a negligiblechange in accuracy is observed in our method compared to the uncalibrated networks.
Table 6: ECE for top-1 predictions (in %) using 25 bins (with lowest in bold and second lowest underlined) onvarious image classification datasets and models with different calibration methods. Note, for this experimentwe use 13 knots for spline fitting.
Table 7: Calibration Error using other different metrics such as binning-free KDE-ECE (Zhang et al. (2020)),MCE (Maximum Calibration Error) (Guo et al. (2017)) and Brier Score for top-1 predictions (with lowest inbold and and second lowest underlined) on ImageNet dataset with different calibration methods. Note, for thisexperiment we use 6 knots for spline fitting.
