Table 1: Top-1 (%) recognition accuracy on the CUB and COmPCars datasets. For base classes: 150-wayclassification on CUB and 240-way classification on CompCars; for K-shot novel classes: 50-way classificationon CUB and 120-way classification on CompCars. Our FBNet consistently achieves the best performance forboth base and novel classes, and joint training significantly outperforms training each module individually.
Table 2: Novel-view synthesis results under the FID and IS metrics. ↑ indicates that higher is better, and ]indicates that lower is better. As a reference, FID and IS of Real Images represent the best results we couldexpect. FBNet consistently outperforms the baselines, achieving 18% improvements for FID and 19% for IS.
Table 3: Few-shot recognition accuracy consistently improves With different feature extraction networks.
Table 4: Ablation studies on CUB regarding (i) learning a shared feature representation through standardmulti-task learning, (ii) FBNet without resolution distillation, and (iii) FBNet using a regular classificationnetwork without prototypical classification. Our full model achieves the best performance.
Table A: Top-1 (%) recognition accuracy on the NAB and DOG datasets. For base classes: 350-way classificationon NAB and 80-way classification on DOG; for K -shot novel classes: 205-way classification on NAB and40-way classification on DOG. Again, our FBNet consistently achieves the best performance for both base andnovel classes.
Table B: Quantitative results of novel-view synthesis under the FID and IS metrics on the NAB and DOGdatasets. ↑ indicates that higher is better, and ] indicates that lower is better. FBNet consistently outperforms thebaselines.
Table C: Top-1 (%) recognition accuracy for our approach and other state-of-the-art few-shot methods, includingdata hallucination-based methods on CompCars. Our FBNet consistently outperforms the other models.
Table D: Top-1 (%) recognition accuracy for recognition modules with PN (prototypical network) and RN(Relation Network), respectively, on the CUB and CompCars datasets. For base classes: 150-way classificationon CUB and 240-way classification on CompCars; for K -shot novel classes: 50-way classification on CUB and120-way classification on CompCars. The proposed FBNet consistently improves the performance of the singlerecognition modules for both PN and RN, indicating the generality of our framework.
