Table 1: MNIST: KIP and LS vs baselines. Comparing KRR (kernel ridge-regression) and NN (neuralnetwork) algorithms using various architectures and dataset distillation methods on datasets of varying sizes(10 to 10K).
Table 2: CIFAR-10: KIP and LS vs baselines. Comparing KRR (kernel ridge-regression) and NN (neuralnetwork) algorithms using various architectures and dataset distillation methods on datasets of various sizes(10 to 10K). Notation same as in Table 1.
Table A1: Accuracy on random subsets of MNIST. Stan-dard deviations over 20 resamplings.
Table A2: Accuracy on random subsets of CIFAR-10. Standard deviations over 20 re-samplings.
Table A3: Classification performance on MNIST. Our KIP -datasets, fit toFC1 or RBF kernels, outperform non-convolutional kernels trained on all train-ing images.
Table A4: CIFAR-10 test accuracy for FC/RBF kernels. Our KIP -datasets, fit to RBF/FC1,outperform baselines with many more images. Notation same as in Table A3.
Table A5: KIP transfer to NN vs NN baselines on MNIST. For each group of four experiments, thebest number is marked boldface, while the second best number is in italics. Corruption refers to 90% noisecorruption. KIP images used FC1-3, Conv1-2 kernel during training.
Table A6: KIP transfer to NN vs NN baselines on CIFAR-10. Notation same as in Table A5.
Table A7: MNIST. KIP and natural images on FC1. MSE Loss. Test accuracy of image datasetsof size 1K, 5K, 10K, trained using FC1 neural network using mean-square loss. Dataset size, noisecorruption percent, and dataset type are varied: natural refers to natural images, KIP refers to KIP -learned images with either augmentations only (a) or both augmentations with label learning (a + l).
Table A8: MNIST. KIP and natural images on FC1. Cross Entropy Loss. Test accuracy ofimage datasets trained using FC1 neural network using cross entropy loss. Notation same as inTable A7.
Table A9: CIFAR-10. KIP and natural images on FC1. MSE Loss. Test accuracy of imagedatasets trained using FC1 neural network using mean-square loss. Notation same as in Table A7.
Table A10: CIFAR-10. KIP and natural images on FC1. Cross Entropy Loss. Test accuracyof image datasets trained using FC1 neural network using cross entropy loss. Notation same as inTable A7.
