Table 1: Pose estimation results on PASCAL3D+ and the occluded PASCAL3D+ dataset. Occlusionlevel L0 are the orignal images from PASCAL3D+, while Occlusion Level L1 to L3 are the occludedPASCAL3D+ images with increasing occlusion ratio. We evaluate both baseline and NeMo usingAccuracy (percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lower better). Note that NeMo isexceptionally robust to partial occlusion.
Table 2: Pose estimation results of ObjectNet3D. Evaluated via pose estimation accuracy percentagefor error under ∏6 (higher better). Both baseline and NeMo evaluated on all images of given category,including occluded and truncated. Overall, NeMo has higher accuracy in 14 categories while lowerin 4 categories.
Table 3: Pose estimation results on PASCAL3D+ for objects in seen and unseen poses. The his-togram on the left shows how we separate the PASCAL3D+ test dataset into subsets based on theazimuth pose of the object. We have similarly split the training dataset and trained all models onlyon the ”seen” subset. We evaluate on both test sets (Seen & Unseen). Note the strong generalizationperformance of NeMo in unseen view points.
Table 4: Ablation study on PASCAL3D+ and occluded PASCAL3D+. All ablation experiments areconducted with the NeMo-MultiCuboid model. The performance is reported in terms of Accuracy(percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lower better).
Table 5: Sensitivity of NeMo-MultiCuboid under different numbers of pose initializations duringinference (Init Samples) on PASCAL3D+.
Table 6: Pose estimation results on PASCAL3D+ (L0) for all categories respectively. Results re-ported in Accuracy (percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lower better).
Table 7: Pose estimation results on occluded PASCAL3D+ occlusion L1 for all categories respec-tively. Results reported in Accuracy (percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lowerbetter).
Table 8: Pose estimation results on occluded PASCAL3D+ occlusion L2 for all categories respec-tively. Results reported in Accuracy (percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lowerbetter).
Table 9: Pose estimation results on occluded PASCAL3D+ occlusion L3 for all categories respec-tively. Results reported in Accuracy (percentage, higher better) and Median Error (degree, lowerbetter).
Table 10: Full table for 5. This table shows category specific results of NeMo-MultiCuboid poseestimation performance on PASCAL3D+ using different number of initialization pose during in-ference. The Init Samples shows total number of initialization pose e.g. 144 means we uniformlysample 12(azimuth) * 4(elevation) * 3(in-plane rotation) poses. Std. mean this setting is standardsettings and used in main experiment.
Table 11: Experiment for NeMo-MultiCuboid when subtype is not given during inference. In thew/o subtype experiment we use NMMs of all subtypes to do inference on each image respectively,then pick the predicted pose with subtypes with minimum reconstruction loss. The result demon-strate that distinguishing subtypes is not necessary for pose estimation with NeMo.
Table 12: Pose estimation results on PASCAL3D+ under unseen pose for CAR category. Figureshows the distribution of azimuth in PASCAL3D+ testing set of car category and our splitting.
