Table 1: Dataset statistics.
Table 2: Code summarization results on the CSN dataset (micro F1).
Table 5: Pairwise cosine similarities of the learned language embeddings of the Code Trans-former.
Table 6: Selected snippets starting with is, main, or load (left) and their best embedding matchesfrom other languages (right).
Table 7: Code Summarization hyperparametersA.6 Experimental setupTable 7 shows hyperparameters of our models for code summarization. For all our experiments, weuse a Transformer Decoder with one layer and teacher forcing to generate 6 output sub tokens. Wealso employ label smoothing of 0.1. As optimizer, we use Adam with a learning rate of 8e-5 andweight decay of 3e-5. Batch size during training is 8 with a simulated batch size of 128 achievedby gradient accumulation.
Table 8: The Code Transformer is the only model to correctly identify the notion of getting thenext entry.
Table 9: The CODE TRANSFORMER is the only model to both recognize that the task is to find a fileas well as the fact that it is about the cache. However, it did not correctly predict the file part of themethod name.
Table 10: The Code Transformer and the its context-only variant are the only models correctlyrecognizing the ‘compare’ template in the method body.
Table 11:	The Code Transformer is the only model to recognize that the snippet is similar to astatic factory method which is often preceded with from.
Table 12:	All models could correctly identify the listBlobs() call in the return statement. However,the Code Transformer additionally comprehended that the specified prefix is quite important.
Table 13: Only the CODE TRANSFORMER could correctly identify that it is the op counts that shouldbe logged.
Table 14: Only the Code Transformer and code2seq could identify that the relevant part of themethod is concerned with executing a command instead of returning something.
Table 15: Only the CODE TRANSFORMER was able to link the print functionality to the object thatshould be printed, which can only be inferred from the object’s class in the method parameters.
Table 16: Code summarization results on the CSN dataset (sample-F1).
