Table 1: Clairvoyance and Comparable Software「Note that vernacularly, “pipelining” simply refers to the proce-dural workflow (i.e. from inputs to training, cross-validation, outputs, and evaluation); existing packages focus onimplementing algorithms for prediction models alone, with minimal preprocessing. In contrast, Clairvoyance pro-vides support along the data science pipeline, and across different healthcare pathways requiring decision support.
Table 2: Medical Environments. We consider the range of settings, incl. outpatient, general wards, and ICU data.
Table 3: Predictions Pathway Example. In addition to (online) 6-month ahead predictions of FEV1 in UKCF, wealso test (one-shot) predictions of admission to ICU after 48 hours on the floor in WARDS, and (online) 4-hoursahead predictions of the need for mechanical ventilation in MIMIC (these are extended to treatment and sensingproblems below). As the WARDS prediction is one-shot, what is denoted ‘SASH’ for that excludes the SMS en-sembling step. Note that the canonical attention mechanism does not permit (variable-length) online predictions.
Table 4: Treatment Effects Pathway Example. Results for estimation over different horizon lengths. Note thatthis uses a 〜6,000-Patient subset (from those in Table ??) who received antibiotics at any point, based on dailydecisions on antibiotic treatment, over spans of up to 20 days, with labels distributed 58.9%-to-41.1% overall.
Table 5: Active Sensing Pathway Example. Results at different acquisition rates (using GRUs as base predictors).
Table 6: Research on Medical Time-series Data Imputation. Typically, proposed imputation methods rely onsome downstream dummy prediction task for evaluating utility. However, the datasets, problem types, predictionendpoints, and time-series models themselves do not often coincide. Depending on specific use cases, this dearthof standardized benchmarking does not promote accessible comparison across different proposed techniques.
Table 7: Research on Medical Time-series Prediction Models. Typically, proposals of prediction models payshort attention to the choices regarding upstream imputation of missing and/or irregularly sampled data. Incomparative experiments, a single imputation method is usually fixed w.r.t. all prediction models for evaluation.
Table 8: Background References. Additional table of background references for the experiments in Section 4.
