Table 1: FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalize according to a particular rule. Descriptionlength L is averaged across examples and seeds. The lowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig.
Table 2: Multiplication by 3. FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalize according to aparticular rule. Description length L is averaged across examples and seeds. The lowest L are in boldand * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-3, paired t-test).
Table 3:	Effect of the number of layers (NLayer): FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalizeaccording to a particular rule. Description length L is averaged across examples and seeds. Thelowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-2, paired t-test.). ’-' denotessettings where learners have lower than 70% success rate on the train set.
Table 4:	Effect of the hidden size (SHidden): FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalizeaccording to a particular rule. Description length L is averaged across examples and seeds. Thelowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-2, paired t-test).
Table 5:	Effect of the embedding size (SEmb): FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalizeaccording to a particular rule. Description length L is averaged across examples and seeds. Thelowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-2, paired t-test).
Table 6:	Effect of dropout probability: FPA measures the fraction of seeds that generalize accordingto a particular rule. Description length L is averaged across examples and seeds. The lowest L are inbold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-2, paired t-test).
Table 7: SCAN: Accuracy is averaged across seeds and examples. Description length L is averagedacross examples and seeds. The lowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-3,paired t-test).
Table 8: Measuring biases of joint source-target self-attention learners: FPA measures the fraction ofseeds that generalize according to a particular rule. Description length L is averaged across examplesand seeds. The lowest L are in bold and * denotes stat. sig. difference in L (p < 10-2, paired t-test).
