Figure 1: In the setting considered in this work, Counterfactual estimators of experimental out-comes (step 1, left) are used to propose experimental hypotheses (step 2, center) for validation inin vitro experiments with genetic interventions (step 3, right), such as CRISPR knockouts, in orderto discover potential causal associations between biological entities that could be relevant for thedevelopment of novel therapeutics. The trained counterfactual estimators can be used to direct theexperimental search towards the space of biological interest, and thus more efficiently explore thevast space of genetic interventions. After every cycle, experimental data are generated that couldlead to mechanistic scientific discoveries forming the basis for new therapeutics development, andguide subsequent experiment cycles with enhanced counterfactual estimators.
Figure 2: The evaluation of the model trained with STRING treatment descriptors at each activelearning cycle for 4 datasets and 3 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis is the activelearning cycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of data pointscollected so far. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 3: The hit ratio of different acquisition for BNN model, different target datasets, and differentacquisition batch sizes. We use STRING treatment descriptors here. The x-axis shows the numberof data points collected so far during the active learning cycles. The y-axis shows the ratio of the setof interesting genes that have been found by the acquisition function up until each cycle.
Figure 4:	The evaluation of the model trained with STRING treatment descriptors at each activelearning cycle for 4 datasets and 6 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis is the activelearning cycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of data pointscollected so far. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 5:	The evaluation of the model trained with Achilles treatment descriptors at each activelearning cycle for 4 datasets and 6 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis is the activelearning cycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of data pointscollected so far. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 6:	The evaluation of the model trained with CCLE treatment descriptors at each active learn-ing cycle for 4 datasets and 6 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis is the active learningcycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of data points collected sofar. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 7:	The hit ratio of different acquisition for BNN model, different target datasets, and differentacquisition batch sizes. We use STRING treatment descriptors here. The x-axis shows the numberof data points collected so far during the active learning cycles. The y-axis shows the ratio of the setof interesting genes that have been found by the acquisition function up until each cycle.
Figure 8:	The hit ratio of different acquisition for BNN model, different target datasets, and differentacquisition batch sizes. We use Achilles treatment descriptors here. The x-axis shows the numberof data points collected so far during the active learning cycles. The y-axis shows the ratio of the setof interesting genes that have been found by the acquisition function up until each cycle.
Figure 9:	The hit ratio of different acquiSition for BNN model, different target dataSetS, and differentacquiSition batch SizeS. We uSe CCLE treatment deScriptorS here. The x-axiS ShowS the number ofdata pointS collected So far during the active learning cycleS. The y-axiS ShowS the ratio of the Set ofintereSting geneS that have been found by the acquiSition function up until each cycle.
Figure 10:	The evaluation of the random forest model trained with STRING treatment descriptorsat each active learning cycle for 4 datasets and 6 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis isthe active learning cycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of datapoints collected so far. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 11:	The evaluation of the random forest model trained with CCLE treatment descriptors ateach active learning cycle for 4 datasets and 6 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis isthe active learning cycles multiplied by the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of datapoints collected so far. The y-axis is the test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 12:	The hit ratio of different acquiSition for random foreSt model, different target dataSetS,and different acquiSition batch SizeS. We uSe STRING treatment deScriptorS here. The x-axiS ShowSthe number of data pointS collected So far during the active learning cycleS. The y-axiS ShowS theratio of the Set of intereSting geneS that have been found by the acquiSition function up until eachcycle.
Figure 13: The hit ratio of different acquiSition for random foreSt model, different target dataSetS,and different acquiSition batch SizeS. We uSe CCLE treatment deScriptorS here. The x-axiS ShowSthe number of data pointS collected So far during the active learning cycleS. The y-axiS ShowS theratio of the Set of intereSting geneS that have been found by the acquiSition function up until eachcycle.
Figure 14:	The evaluation of the random forest model trained with CCLE and STRING treatmentdescriptors at each active learning cycle for the datasets (Sanchez et al., 2021) and (Zhu et al., 2021)and also for 5 acquisition batch sizes. In each plot, the x-axis is the active learning cycles multipliedby the acquisition bath size that gives the total number of data points collected so far. The y-axis isthe test MSE error evaluated on the test data.
Figure 15:	The hit ratio of different acquisition for random forest model, different target datasets,and different acquisition batch sizes. We use STRING and CCLE treatment descriptors here. Thex-axis shows the number of data points collected so far during the active learning cycles. The y-axisshows the ratio of the set of interesting genes that have been found by the acquisition function upuntil each cycle.
