Figure 1: Map induction: We propose how humans might infer the structure of unobserved spacesbased on priors constructed from observations of other environments or different parts of the samespacee. Map induction can minimize exploration cost by filling in incomplete or missing observa-tions from experience.
Figure 2: An example of an MIT task. A. A 2-dimensional grid discretization showing the mapused for modeling exploration trajectory. The black cells indicate walls, and the red cells indicatereward locations. B. The 3-dimensional world, in which subjects search for rewards (shown as bluediamonds on a red platform), seen from an overhead perspective in the Unity Design system. C.
Figure 3: Model architecture. A. Four steps required to solve the MIT task and the correspondingcomputational modules in our framework. B. Extracting the candidate regions (submaps) from theknown map, and generating possible map completions by composing these regions and their simpletransformations (e.g., mirror reflections) as defined in the generative grammar of the Map Generator.
Figure 4: Experiment 1 results. A. Exploration trajectories of a representative subject. B. Visitationheatmaps of three example environments aggregated across subjects and pairs of reflected environ-ments. The visited area was computed in a 2D grid projection, using a circular radius of five gridcells around the agent. C. Fractions of environments observed by the models and humans. Errorbars show 95% confidence intervals. D. Log-likelihood that the model takes the same actions asthe human (details in Appendix section A.3). Each marker is a subject-environment pair, with eachcolor showing a single environment: Env1-Env6 (blue-yellow). Error bars show standard error alongeach axis.
Figure 5:	Experiment 2 results. A. Exploration trajectories of a representative subject. B. Visitationheatmaps of three example environments aggregated across subjects. The visited area was computedin a 2D grid projection, using a circular radius of five grid cells around the agent. C. Fractions ofenvironments observed by the models and humans. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. D.
Figure 6:	Top-down views of the stimuli used in Experiment1. A. Practice stimuli. B. Test stimuli.
Figure 7: Screenshots from Experiment1. A. Welcome scene. B. Instructions. C. First practice trial.
Figure 8:	Trajectories and heat-maps from Experiment 1. A. Exploration trajectories of a represen-tative subject. Stimuli are shown in the order presented to the subject (top - bottom). B. Visitationheat-maps aggregated across subjects. Each subject’s visited area was computed in a 2D represen-tation of the environment, using a circular radius of five grid cells centered at the cells traversed bythe subject.
Figure 9:	Top-down views of the stimuli used in Experiment 2. A. Practice stimuli. B. Test stimuli.
Figure 10: Screenshots from Experiment 2. A. Welcome scene. B. Instructions. C. Instruction Quiz1. D. Second practice trial. E. Pop-up window displayed at the end of a successful trial. F. Pop-upwindow displayed when the subject runs out of time before collecting all diamonds. G. InstructionQuiz 2. H. Instructions for test trials. I. Instruction quiz 3. J. Sample first test trial.
Figure 11: Controls skill test in Experiment 2. A. Instructions about the Controls skill trial. B.
Figure 12: Trajectories and heat-maps from Experiment 2. A. Exploration trajectories of a singlerepresentative subject. Stimuli are shown in the order presented to the subject (top - bottom). B.
Figure 13:	Experiment 1 visitation heat-maps aggregated across subjects. A. Heat-maps for thefirst presentation of environments. B. Heat-maps for the second presentation of environments. Thestimuli in the second presentation were reflected versions of the ones in the first presentation asshown in Figure 6.
Figure 14:	Experiment 2 visitation heat-maps aggregated across subjects. A. Heat-maps for whenthe base environments are shown during the first presentation. B. Heat-maps for when the baseenvironments are shown during the second presentation. The stimuli in the second presentationwere reflected versions of the ones in the first presentation as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 15: Illustration showing how the maps are qualitatively broken into convex rooms (discreteareas) A. Env1 stimulus from Experiment 1. B. Set of convex rooms defined for Env1. Each colorindicates a separate convex room.
Figure 16: Model visitation heatmaps from two sample environments in Experiment 1. A. Env1. B.
Figure 17: Model visitation heatmaps from two sample environments in Experiment 2. A. Env1.
