Figure 1: Triple-based (left) and hyper-relational (right) queries. The answer set of the hyper-relational query is reduced with the addition of a qualifier pair, and the final query representationmoves closer to the narrowed down answer.
Figure 2: StarE layer intuition: (1) aggregation γq of qualifiers into a single vector; (2) aggregationφr of a main relation with a qualifiers vector; (3) composition of an enriched relation with the headentity; (4) final message to the tail node.
Figure 3: The hyper-relational formulas and their graphical structures. The qualifier pairs attachedto each edge may vary in 0..n; for brevity we represent them as a single pair. We also allow qualifiersto exist only on certain edges of a query, i.e., not all edges necessarily contain them.
Figure 4: Example of a reification process: An original hr-2p query pattern (left) is reified throughstandard RDF reification (right). Note the change of the graph topology: the reified variant has twoblank nodes, three new pre-defined relation types, and original edge types became nodes connectedvia the rdf : predicate edge. The distance between the anchor and target increased, too.
Figure 5: The same query expressed in three different approaches. Hyper-relational (left), hyper-graph (middle), and reified (right) graphs.
Figure 6: A diagram of the query generation process. On the far left, the chosen dataset (WD50K)is uploaded in the RDF*-compatible triplestore (AnzoGraph). As a follow up, we translated thehyper-relational query patterns to SPARQL* and executed them against the triplestore to retrievethe desired splits.
Figure 7: Visualization for Appendix F. Original query (black and red) violating the original defi-nition of a valid query graph, and equivalently transformed query (black and blue) which fulfils theproperties becoming 1p-2i query.
Figure 8: A general overview of qualifiers impact on AMRI, Hits@10, and MRR. In all metrics,higher deltas correspond to better prediction performance. Having qualifiers does, on average, leadto better predictions.
