Figure 2: Empirical heatmap of momentum μ versus period T for SGDm for linear regression,overlaid by contours of theoretical prediction. Each pixel is the distance ∣∣θk - θ* || averaged overthe final 500 steps k and 10 runs. Dark pixels converge quickly and stably, bright pixels divergeexponentially. The contours show divergence predictions from Theorem 1: the white contour hasρ = 1, with ρ increasing with redness.
Figure 3: Regression w/ periodic Xk. Eachdot is avg. dist. ∣∣θk - θ*∣∣ over final 500steps. Each color has three peaks: the leftpeak exceeds y scale for all curves, the centerpeak is small enough to appear only for theblack curve, and the right peak appears for allcurves (vanishingly small for the black curve.)Resonance is dampened and right-shifted bydecreasing samples per Xk.
Figure 4: Regression w/ stochastic Xk. Eachmarker is avg. distance ∣∣θk - θ* || over final500 steps (a and b) or 2000 steps (c). ForSGDm, resonance is very sensitive to the Xksignal variance (i.e. amplitude) in (a), andto the number of input dimensions in (b).
Figure 5: Training a neural network withSGDm shows a peak response in the lossaround the band T ∈ [5, 40]. The y-axis isaverage test loss over the final 2000 trainingsteps over 20 runs, with test set obtained viathe stationary distribution of {Xk}. Shadedregions are 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 6: Spectral radii of the monodromy matrices induced by particular momentum μ and period Tvalues (x and y pixel coordinates, respectively). Step-size η decreasing with each row. Each columnshares the same range of μ, T. The right column shows the full range of momentum μ ∈ [0,1] and amuch wider range of periods T than the left. The left column figures simply ‘zoom in‘ to the upperleft corner of the figure to its right. (a) corresponds to the μ, η, T as Experiments 4.1 and 4.2, withcontour lines identical to 2a 2b such that the white line separates the convergent region below fromthe divergent regions above. (b), with the extent of (a) indicated by dotted lines. The figures inthe right column show a horizontal band of minimum spectral radius (i.e. max convergence rate),which suggests that there exists a least-resonating μbest across nearly all frequencies, with only minordeviations toward the far left, where data approaches iid. Though the location of μbest clearly changeswith step-size η, and likely depends upon other aspects of the specific learning problem.
Figure 7: Re-running with reduced momentum values for highest resonance configurations chosenfrom Experiments 4.3 (a), 4.4 (b, c), and 4.6 (d). In all cases, reducing momentum significantlydampens resonant response, with μ = 0.85 completely mitigating resonant response.
Figure 8: Re-running with reduced step-size for Experiments 4.1 (a, c, e) and 4.2 (b, d, f). In bothcases, reducing step-size significantly dampens resonant response.
Figure 9: Re-running with fully stochastic gradients for Experiments 4.1 (a, c, e) and 4.2 (b, d, f). Inall cases, increasing gradient variance significantly dampens resonant response, but does not changeit otherwise.
Figure 10:	Sample trajectories (left) and power spectral densities (right) for Experiment 4.1 (Table 2)for three values of frequency tuning parameter f . The signal is a sinusoid, so we observe a singlefrequency peak translated left or right by f .
Figure 11:	Sample trajectories (left) and power spectral densities (right) for Experiment 4.2 (Table3) for three values of frequency tuning parameter f . The signal is a AR(2) process designed for asingle frequency peak, as observed. The process is stochastic, so its frequency peak is widened bythe imperfect correlation.
Figure 12: Sample trajectories (left) and power spectral densities (right) for Experiment 4.3 (Table 4)for three values of frequency tuning parameter T . The signal is a square wave in a single dimensionfor the figure, but is a square wave randomly oriented in higher dimensions for the actual experiment.
Figure 13: Sample trajectories (left) and power spectral densities (right) for Experiments 4.4-4.6(Tables 4-7) for three values of frequency tuning parameter T . The mean signal is essentially whitenoise ‘stretched’ according to T. The signal is a single dimension for the figure, but is of higherdimensions for the actual experiment. The frequency content is a vertical reflection of Figure 12(right,) with frequency troughs instead of peaks. Note that the frequency content is the mildest of allsettings, having the lowest and least-defined peaks, which aligns with intuition: there is nothing evenremotely oscillatory in its definition. It is reasonable to expect that many ‘natural’ processes wouldhave more aggressive frequency content.
