Figure 1: ReCo pushes representations within a classcloser to the class mean representation, whilst simulta-neously pushing these representations away from neg-ative representations sampled in different classes. Thesampling distribution from negative classes is adaptiveto each query class.
Figure 2: Easy and hard queries (shown in white) determined from the predicted confidence map inthe Cityscapes dataset. Here we set the confidence threshold δs = 0.97.
Figure 3: Visualisation of the ReCo framework applied to semi-supervised segmentation and trainedwith three losses. A supervised loss is computed based on labelled data with ground-truth annota-tions. An unsupervised loss is computed for unlabelled data with generated pseudo-labels. Andfinally a ReCo loss is computed based on pixel-level dense representation predicted from both la-belled and unlabelled images.
Figure 4: Example of training labels for Pascal VOCdataset in Partial Labels Full Dataset setting. (1Pixel is zoomed 5 times for better visualisation.)Datasets We experiment on segmentationdatasets: Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) andPascal VOC 2012 (Everingham et al., 2015)in both partial and full label setting. We alsoevaluate on a more difficult indoor scene dataset SUN RGB-D (Song et al., 2015) in the full labelsetting only, mainly due to the low quality annotations making it difficult for fair evaluation in thepartial label setting. An example of the partially labelled Pascal VOC is shown in Fig. 4.
Figure 5: Visualisation of CityScapes and SUN RGB-D validation set trained on 20 and 50 labelledimages respectively. Interesting regions are shown in white arrows.
Figure 6: Visualisation of Pascal VOC validation set with ClassMix (left) vs. with ReCo (right)trained on 1 labelled pixel per class per image. Interesting regions are shown in white arrows.
Figure 7: mean IoU validation performance on 20 labelled CityScapes dataset based on differentchoices of hyper-parameters. Grey: ClassMix (if not labelled otherwise) in our default setting.
Figure 8: Visualisation of semantic class relation graph (top) and its corresponding semantic classdendrogram (bottom) on CityScapes dataset. Brighter colour represents closer (more confused)relationship. Best viewed in zoom.
Figure 9: Visualisation of semantic class dendrogrambased on embedding R on SUN RGB-D dataset usingReCo + Supervised method. Best viewed in zoom.
