Figure 1: Method Overview. a) Our energy-inspired neural optimization formulation aims to optimize theinitial conformer of a molecule towards the most stable and energy-minimized state, following an energy gradientfield approximated by a neural network. b) To minimize the conformational energy, we can perform gradientdescent for the 3D coordinates along the energy landscape, where the gradient is estimated by the model. c) Tomodel the gradient fields, the neural network φ considers the current 3D conformation, the atom representations,and the relationship embeddings. After layers of non-linear transformations and SE(3)-equivariant operations,the model returns the gradient updates for the 3D coordinate along with the updated atom representations.
Figure 2: Model-Predicted Conformers. Molecule 1 & 2 are sampled from the QM9 dataset, and the largermolecule 3 & 4 are sampled from the GEOM-Drugs dataset. The reference conformer, as well as the initialconformations from RDKit+MMFF, are also shown. See Appendix L for more examples and failure cases.
Figure 3: HOMO-LUMO gap calculated with reference conformers vs. ones calculated with the predictedconformers. The black dotted line represents the identical values. Four hundred molecules are sampled.
Figure S1: Boltzmann Weights for Conformers in GEOM-Drugs Dataset. For each molecule in the GEOM-Drugs dataset, multiple conformers are generated with a Boltzmann weight associated with them, representingtheir energy stability. a) We divide the Boltzmann weight of the most likely conformer with the one of thesecond likely conformer. The distribution of the ratio is shown, and many of the conformers have at least twotop conformers that share a similar Boltzmann weight. b) We show an example where two conformers in verydifferent shapes could share very similar Boltzmann weight.
Figure S2: Model Architecture for Ours-TwoAtom. a) Overall architecture with one optimization blockconsisting multiple optimization layer. b) Optimization for v where dij = kxi - xj k. c) Optimization for xwhere rij = xi - xj .
Figure S3: Influence of Number of Unrolled Optimization StepsL More Examples of Model-Optimized ConformersPlease see next page.
Figure S4: More Examples of Model-Predicted Conformers. Molecule 1-6 are sampled from the QM9dataset, and the larger molecule 7-12 are sampled from the GEOM-Drugs dataset. The reference conformer,as well as the initial conformations from RDKit+MMFF, are also shown. Green IDs are the successful caseswhere the predicted conformers’ RMSD are ≤ 10% of the population. Red IDs are the failure cases where thepredicted conformers’ RMSD are ≥ 90% of the population. Yellow IDs are the ones with RMSD between 45%and 55% of the population.
