Figure 1: Marginal coverage (i.e., the percent of test labels that are included in the predictionsets) and average set-size obtained by vanilla conformal prediction (Vanilla CP) and our RSCPmethod, evaluated on the test set of CIFAR10. We use a VGG-19 classifier and set the nominalcoverage level to be (1 - α) = 0.9. See Section 5 and Supplementary Section S8 for more details.
Figure 2: Schematic demonstration of the effect of an adversarial noise on vanilla split conformalprediction, along with our proposed solution. The vanilla conformal set C(X) and our RSCP setCδ (X) are generated as described in (5) and (8), respectively. The black arrows point to the valuesof the non-conformity scores that correspond to the clean (left) and adversarial (right) test points,which are further marked by the vertical purple lines.
Figure 3: The effect of σon the size of RSCP’s predic-tion sets. The results corre-spond to the CIFAR100, withδ = 0.125 and ns = 256.
Figure 4: The effect of the number of noise realizations ns(used to estimate the smoothed score) on the marginal coverage(left) and size (right) of prediction sets constructed by RSCP.
Figure 5: Marginal coverage (left) and average set-size (right) obtained by different conformal meth-ods. The target coverage level is 90%.
Figure S6:	The importance of using robust models. Marginal coverage (left) and average set-size(right) obtained by different conformal methods. The target coverage level is 90%.
Figure S7:	The effect of σ on the marginal coverage (top) and size (bottom) of prediction sets con-structed by RSCP. Here, δ and ns are fixed and equal to 0.125 and 256 for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100,and 0.25 and 64 for ImageNet.
Figure S8:	The effect of the number of noise realizations ns (used to estimate the smoothed score)on the marginal coverage (top) and size (bottom) of prediction sets constructed by RSCP. Here, δand σ are fixed and equal to 0.125 and 0.25 for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, and to 0.25 and 0.5 forImageNet respectively.
Figure S9:	A comparison between ResNet, VGG, and DenseNet models, deployed to the CIFAR10(bottom) and CIFAR100 (top) data sets. Marginal coverage (left) and average set-size (right) ob-tained by different conformal methods. The target coverage level is 90%.
