Figure 1: Geometry of a POMDP with two states, two actions and two observations. The top showsthe observation policy polytope △OA ; the associated state policy polytope △SA (yellow) along withits subset of effective policies ∆S,β (blue); and the corresponding sets of discounted state-actionfrequencies in the simplex Δs×a (a tetrahedron in this case). The bottom shows the graph of theexpected cumulative discounted reward R as a function of the observation policy π ; the state policyτ ; and the discounted state-action frequencies η . We characterize the parametrization and geometryof these domains and the structure of the expected cumulative reward function.
Figure 2: Graph describing the deterministic transition kernel α and the associated instantaneousrewards.
Figure 3: Plot of the reward function for initial distributions δs on the left and of a three-dimensionalrandom projection of the set of feasible discounted state-action frequencies on the right.
Figure 4: The left shows the transition graph of the toy example. The right shows the observationmechanism; the numbers on the edges indicate the observation probabilities.
Figure 5: Policy gradient optimization trajectories (shown as black curves) in the observation policypolytope. As expected, since the problem is non-convex and has several distinct local optimizers,the trajectories converge to different local optimizers depending on the initial policy.
Figure 6: Depiction of a grid world; the reward of R is obtained in state 1, the actions are{R, L, U, D} corresponding to movements to the right, left, up and down; observed are the pos-sible directions that the agent can move in. Once the agent transitions to state 1, she transfers tostate 7 and 13 uniformly.
Figure 7: Depiction of the policy π, which is found using the polynomial programming formulationof the POMDP and applying the interior point method Ipopt implemented in the Julia libraries JuMPand Ipopt; an arrow into two direction indicates that the agent moves into those two directions withprobability close to 1/2.
Figure 8: A random three-dimensional projection of the set of discounted state-action frequencies ofthe MDP is the polytope defined by the dashed straight edges. The same random three-dimensionalprojection of the set of feasible discounted state-action frequencies is the basic semialgebraic setwhere the edges are shown by the solid lines. Both of those sets are combinatorially equivalent to athree dimensional cube.
