Figure 1: Illustration of the variability of the A* ∈ R65×4 matrices within the data set of Section 3.
Figure 2: (a) PALM median NMSE and required number of iterations w.r.t λ over 45 samples of thetrain set; (b) LPALM average NMSEs per layer on both train and test sets.
Figure 3: First row: LPALM estimate and ground truth of the four columns of the mixing matrix,second row: LPALM estimated sources, third row: ground truth sources.
Figure 4: VCA results when applied to the data of Figure 3.
Figure 5: MNNBU predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2Figure 6: SNMF predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2To experimentally confirm the unrolling choices we did for the S-update in Section 2.1, we assessthe robustness of LISTA and LISTA-CP in the presence of mixing matrix variabilities at the train-ing and testing stages. We also test ISTA-LLT (ISTA with Learned LS and Threshold), which is16Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 7: DNMF predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2parameterized as follows:(11)The goal of this subsection is twofold : 1) in the SBSS context, A* varies between the samples:we determine which of the tested unrolling methods is more robust in such a setting; 2) while theupdates of LISTA-CP (Eq. 7) and ISTA-LLT (Eq. 11) require in principle the perfect knowledgeof A* for each sample, in SBSS A* is unknown in the test phase and must be iteratively estimatedwithin LPALM. Therefore, we evaluate LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLT when A* is perfectly estimatedbut also when it is not. The total number of layers for the unrolled methods is K = 25. The weightsinitialization is described in the Appendix A. To assess the quality of LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLTwhen A* is not perfectly known, a corrupted version of the mixing matrix A* + NA , with NA awhite Gaussian noise such that the SNR with respect to A* is 10 dB, is used in LISTA-CP (7) andISTA-LLT (11) updates. The corresponding algorithm results are denoted as LISTA-CP (SNR = 10
Figure 6: SNMF predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2To experimentally confirm the unrolling choices we did for the S-update in Section 2.1, we assessthe robustness of LISTA and LISTA-CP in the presence of mixing matrix variabilities at the train-ing and testing stages. We also test ISTA-LLT (ISTA with Learned LS and Threshold), which is16Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 7: DNMF predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2parameterized as follows:(11)The goal of this subsection is twofold : 1) in the SBSS context, A* varies between the samples:we determine which of the tested unrolling methods is more robust in such a setting; 2) while theupdates of LISTA-CP (Eq. 7) and ISTA-LLT (Eq. 11) require in principle the perfect knowledgeof A* for each sample, in SBSS A* is unknown in the test phase and must be iteratively estimatedwithin LPALM. Therefore, we evaluate LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLT when A* is perfectly estimatedbut also when it is not. The total number of layers for the unrolled methods is K = 25. The weightsinitialization is described in the Appendix A. To assess the quality of LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLTwhen A* is not perfectly known, a corrupted version of the mixing matrix A* + NA , with NA awhite Gaussian noise such that the SNR with respect to A* is 10 dB, is used in LISTA-CP (7) andISTA-LLT (11) updates. The corresponding algorithm results are denoted as LISTA-CP (SNR = 10dB) and ISTA-LLT (SNR = 10 dB) in Figure 8.
Figure 7: DNMF predicted spectra from the data set of Section 3.2parameterized as follows:(11)The goal of this subsection is twofold : 1) in the SBSS context, A* varies between the samples:we determine which of the tested unrolling methods is more robust in such a setting; 2) while theupdates of LISTA-CP (Eq. 7) and ISTA-LLT (Eq. 11) require in principle the perfect knowledgeof A* for each sample, in SBSS A* is unknown in the test phase and must be iteratively estimatedwithin LPALM. Therefore, we evaluate LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLT when A* is perfectly estimatedbut also when it is not. The total number of layers for the unrolled methods is K = 25. The weightsinitialization is described in the Appendix A. To assess the quality of LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLTwhen A* is not perfectly known, a corrupted version of the mixing matrix A* + NA , with NA awhite Gaussian noise such that the SNR with respect to A* is 10 dB, is used in LISTA-CP (7) andISTA-LLT (11) updates. The corresponding algorithm results are denoted as LISTA-CP (SNR = 10dB) and ISTA-LLT (SNR = 10 dB) in Figure 8.
Figure 8: NMSE of several unrolled non-blind architectures, compared to ISTA truncated to 25layers. The LISTA-CP and ISTA-LLT curves correspond to the updates (7) and (11) where A* isperfectly known. The LISTA-CP (SNR = 10 dB), ISTA-LLT (SNR = 10 dB) and ISTA (SNR = 10dB) curves correspond to updates using a noisy estimate of A*.
Figure 9: Prediction vs ground truth of: From (a) to (d) the mixing matrix, from (e) to (h) the sources(the ground truth sources are shown from (i) to (l))19Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022D.4 Impact of the number of layers in LPALMIn this subsection, we study the impact of LPALM number of layers on the final estimate quality.
Figure 10: Evolution of the sum of the NMSE over the A and S estimates predicted by LPALM asa function of the network number of layers K .
