Figure 1: Structure and mild assumptions of ourproposed framework. x, s, u and z are the ob-served data variables, the sources, the additionallyobserved variable and the estimated latent vari-ables, respectively. f and g are the mixing func-tion and estimating function, respectively, andboth of them are volume-preserving. Conditionedon u, the sources s are assumed to be independent,while the estimated latent variables z is requiredto follow a factorial multivariate Gaussian.
Figure 2: Sketch of the discussion about condition (iii). The blue and the green ellipses representq(z|u(1)) and q(z|u(2)), respectively, and their lengths of major and minor axes correspond to σ1-1and σ2-1. The red solid arrows represent the estimated latent variables (z1, z2), while the red dashedarrows represent the obtained new latent variables (z01 , z02). The black solid arrows represent twooperations: scaling to let one Gaussian (represented by blue ellipse) isotropic, and rotation aroundthe center with arbitrary angle. (a) If condition (iii) is not satisfied, then the latent variables obtainedby the two operations are still independent conditioned on both u(1) and u(2). (b) If condition (iii)is satisfied, then the obtained latent variables are no longer independent conditioned on u(2) .
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of iVAE and GIN on artificial dataset with two classes. (a) groundtruth (observations of the sources) consists of samples from two Gaussians, which are visualized bytwo different colors. (b) 2-dim projection of the 10-dim data points. (c) and (d) estimations of theground truth by iVAE and GIN, respectively. The plotted estimated latent variables are chosen byassignment of correlation coefficients between sources and all estimated latent variables.
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of iVAE and GIN on Triangles images. Each row is traversal bymanipulating one estimated latent variable. The last image of each row represents the heat map (themap of changed pixels) of that row, generating by taking the difference of the 3rd and 7th images.
Figure 5: Traversals of estimated latent variables w/ top 4 standard deviations by GIN on MNIST.
Figure 7: Qualitative results of ablation study.
Figure 8: Traversals of estimated latent variables with top 6 standard deviations by GIN on CelebA.
