Figure 1: A toy example (redrawn from real experiments) illustrating different types of informationin real-world graphs and the two-dimensional node embedding spaces learned by different models.
Figure 2: The information source/receptive field of the node representation hV2).
Figure 3: The diagram of our model using an example With 2 GNN layers as the encoder.
Figure 4: Hyper-parameter and efficiency studies of NWR-GAE—Dataset: SquirrelSample Size: 10Sample Size: 15DeepWaIk (convergence)DGI (convergence)Sample Size: 5Sample Size: 10Sample Size: 15DeepWaIk (convergence)DGI (convergence)(a) Perf. vs. emb. sizes(c) Runtimes vs. samp. sizes5	ConclusionIn this work, we address the limitations of existing unsupervised graph representation methods andpropose the first model that can properly capture the proximity, structure and feature information ofnodes in graphs, and discriminatively encode them in the low-dimensional embedding space. Themodel is extensively tested on both synthetic and real-world benchmark datasets, and the resultsstrongly support its claimed advantages. Since it is general, efficient, and also conceptually well-understood, we believe it to have the potential to serve as the de facto method for unsupervised graph
Figure 5: Toy example of proximity and structure information: A and B are “close in proximity”since they are relatively close in terms of node distances in the global network, whereas A and C are“close in structure” since they have relatively similar local neighborhood structures.
Figure 6: Synthetic dataset examples (Colors denote structural role labels and dashed lines denoterandomly adding or deleting edges)(b) Perturbed(c) Varied (house, star, fan, etc.)C Detailed settings of the compared modelsDeepWalk: for all datasets, we ran 10 random walks of length 40 and input these walks into askipgram langauge model. We implement the DeepWalk method based on Python code (GPLv3license) provided by Perozzi et al. (2014).
Figure 7: Embedding spaces reduced to two-dimensional through PCA on Chameleon dataset.
