Figure 1: (a) Architecture of UnTAN module. This module takes D-dimensional irregularly sampledtime points t = [tι,…，t0] and corresponding observations X = [xι,…，XD] as keys and valuesand produces a fixed dimensional representation at the query time points r = [ri,…，rκ]. Sharedtime embedding and attention function provide input to parallel intensity (INT) and value (VAL) en-coding networks, whose outputs are subsequently fused via concatenation and an additional linearencoding layer. (b) Architecture of HeTVAE consisting of the UnTAND module to represent inputuncertainty, parallel probabilistic (Prob) and deterministic (Det) encoding paths, and a heteroscedas-tic output layer that aims to reflect uncertainty due to input sparsity in the output distribution.
Figure 2: We show example interpolations onthe synthetic dataset. The set of 3 columnscorrespond to interpolation results with in-creasing numbers of observed points: 3, 10and 20 respectively. The first, second andthird rows correspond to STGP, HeTVAEand HTVAE mTAN respectively. The shadedregion corresponds to ± one standard devia-tion. STGP and HetVAE exhibit variable out-put uncertainty in response to input sparsitywhile mTAN does not.
Figure 3:	In this figure, we show example interpolations of one dimension corresponding to HeartRate on the PhysioNet dataset. The columns correspond to different examples. The rows corre-spond to STGP, HeTVAE, HTVAE mTAN, HeTVAE-DET-ALO and HeTVAE-DET respectively.
Figure 4:	Additional interpolation results on the synthetic dataset. The 3 columns correspond tointerpolation results with increasing numbers of observed points: 3, 10 and 20 respectively. Theshaded region corresponds to ± one standard deviation. STGP and HeTVAE exhibit variable outputuncertainty in response to input sparsity while mTAN and HeTVAE - INT do not.
Figure 5: In this figure, we show example interpolations on the synthetic dataset with increas-ing maximum inter-observation gap. The columns correspond to an inter-observation gap of size20%, 40%, 60% and 80% of the length of original time series. The rows correspond to STGP, HeT-VAE, HTVAE mTAN and HeTVAE-INT respectively. The shaded region corresponds to the confi-dence region. STGP and HeTVAE exhibit variable output uncertainty while mTAN and HeTVAE-INT does not.
