Figure 1: Performance of DemoDICE and baseline algorithms on mixed-dataset tasks M1, M2,and M3. Especially, in the M3 task, which contains a large number of bad trajectories, DemoDICEmaintains performance while ValueDICE, BCND, and BC fail to achieve competitive performance.
Figure 2: Performance of DemoDICE and baseline algorithms for replay buffer task RB. In RBtasks, DemoDICE achieves better or competitive performances compared to the other baselines. Weplot the mean and the standard error (shaded area) of the normalized scores over 5 random seeds.
Figure 3: 1 Learning curves of DemoDICE during 2 million training iterations in HalfCheetah mixeddataset tasks (M1, M2, M3).
Figure 4:	Performance of variants ofBC with β ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0} and DemoDICE both onthe mixed datasets (M1, M2, M3) and the replay buffer datasets. We plot the mean and the standarderrors (shaded area) of normalized scores over 5 random seeds.
Figure 5:	Performance of DemoDICE and baseline algorithms on alternative mixed-dataset tasksI1, I2, and I3. Bold lines and shaded areas indicate the means and the standard errors of normalizedscores over 5 random seeds respectively.
Figure 6:	We compare DemoDICE with baselines when the number of expert trajectories constitut-ing expert demonstrations is 1, 2, 5, and 10. Each performance is measured as a normalized scoreaveraged by the last 5 evaluations during training. Bold lines and shaded areas indicate the meansand the standard errors of converged performances over 5 random seed respectively.
Figure 7:	Performance of DemoDICE by varying α ∈ {10, 1, 0.5, 0.1, 0.05, 0} on the mixed datasetsM3 and the replay buffer datasets. Bold lines and shaded areas indicate the means and the standarderrors (shaded area) of normalized scores over 5 random seeds respectively.
Figure 8:	Performance of DemoDICE and BC with only expert demonstrations. For each environ-ment, we construct expert demonstrations using an increasing number of expert trajectories, namely1, 2, 5, up to 10. Bold lines and shaded areas indicate the means and the standard errors of normal-ized scores over 5 random seeds respectively.
