Figure 1: Illustration of single sample generalization. Dif-ferent colors denote different classes. Circles denote the clas-sifier prototypes for different categories. With our adaptation,the source features and the single target feature together de-fine new classifier prototypes, which are more adapted to thetarget sample.
Figure 2: Illustration of single sample generalization using meta-learning. Through variationalBayesian inference, we incorporate the single sample as a conditional during the generation of modelparameters. The dashed line indicates training only.
Figure 4: Visualization of single sample generalization on the “cartoon” domain from PACS.
Figure 5: Single sample generalization vs. Tent (Wang et al., 2021) for different settings onrotated-MNIST. Tent shows good performance with a large batch of samples from a single domain(left). However, when provided only one sample or given samples from different domains without thedomain id (right), Tent suffers. More detailed comparisons are provided in Appendix F.
Figure 6:	Visualization of single sample generalization on PACS. We plot the test samples andclassifiers in the same 2D plane. Different shapes denote different categories. Samples are in red,classifiers in blue. The baseline method produces the same classifier for all samples from eachdomain, while our method generates the classifier adapted to each target sample. The two methodsuse the same test samples from each domain. The test sample is shown in the left-top corner of eachsub-figure. The visualization shows why our model performs better.
Figure 7:	Failure case visualizations of our method. The visualization settings are the same asFigure 6. Our method makes wrong predictions, be it that the correct classifiers are also close tothe samples, which shows that the classifiers generated by our method are still adapted to the givensample in these cases.
Figure 8: Single sample generalization vs. Tent for different settings on rotated-MNIST. Tentshows good performance with a large batch of samples from a single domain (left). When providedonly one sample or when given samples from different domains, without their domain id (right), Tentsuffers. In contrast, our method is independent to the number of target samples and domains.
