Figure 1: Illustration of the negative impact on ignoring the compositional structure of the repre-sentation space using dSprites dataset: (a) Illustration of z (from embedding space) and m (fromintermediate layers). (b) z is not disentangled sufficiently when m is not disentangled sufficiently.
Figure 2: Recursive Disentanglement NetworkThe first Recursive Module of the encoder is implemented by a multi-channel convolutional net-work (Lawrence et al., 1997) to encode the original image x. Following the notation in Section 2.2,the output of the 1-st Recursive Module is denoted as m2 , which is also the input of 2-nd Re-cursive Module. As for the l-th (l ≥ 2) Recursive Module, it contains (1) a Router R to learn acomposition matrix wl from the input features ml to decompose ml into subsets; and (2) a Group-of-Encoders (GoE) layer consisting of n encoders to induce the output feature ml+1.
Figure 3: Reconstruction error vs. disentanglement performance. Scatters located at the left topindicate better performance. The area of each scatter represents the minimal sufficiency score esti-mated by I(x; z), and smaller area indicates better performance.
Figure 4: The performance of RecurD With varying numberof recursive modules on the principled properties.
Figure 5: First roW: original images. Second Figure 6: Ablation study on λ1, λ2 and grouproW: reconstructions. Remaining roWs: recon- size k . Note that RecurD With λ2 = 0 reduces tostructions of latent traversals.	β-VAE With the compositional architecture.
Figure 7: Performance comparison of RecurDand baselines on the standard classification task(left) and the domain generalization task (right).
Figure 8: Reconstruction error vs. disentanglement performance on dSprites. Scatters located at theleft top indicate better performance.
Figure 9: Reconstruction error vs. disentanglement performance on 3DShapes. Scatters located atthe left top indicate better performance.
Figure 10: Ablation study on λ1 and λ2 on dSprites.
Figure 11: Ablation study on λ1 and λ2 on dSprites.
Figure 12: Ablation study on λ1 and λ2 on 3DShapes.
Figure 13: Ablation study on λ1 and λ2 on 3DShapes.
Figure 14: Ablation study on k on dSprites.
Figure 15: Ablation study on k on dSprites.
Figure 16: Ablation study on k on 3DShapes.
Figure 17: Ablation study on k on 3DShapes.
Figure 18: Traversal samples on dSprites.
Figure 19: Traversal samples on 3DShapes.
Figure 20: Traversal samples on CelebA(Azimuth).
Figure 21: Traversal samples on CelebA(Background Color).
Figure 22: Traversal samples on CelebAFigure 23: Traversal samples on CelebA(Face Width).
Figure 23: Traversal samples on CelebA(Face Width).
Figure 24: Traversal samples on CelebA(Gender).
Figure 25: Traversal samples on CelebA(Smile).
