Figure 1: Feed-forward computational chart for training UA-L2O. Notations are as in the main text.
Figure 2: Computational procedure for uncertainty quantification: given a designated confidence score σ,calculating the length of confidence interval rσ and its corresponding estimated confidence σ .
Figure 3: Optimization and uncertainty performance of different methods in three non-convex test functions.
Figure 4: Optimization performance versus UQ results (0.9, 0.8, r0.9 and r0.8) of UA-L2O for 318 test sam-ples in data privacy attack.
Figure 5: Scatter plot of optimization per-formance versus the length of confidence in-terval for five cases in protein docking. ThePearson correlation coefficient achieved byBAL is -0.80, and that by UA-L2O is 0.59.
Figure 6: Estimated posterior distributions, confidence intervals and ground truth solutions for cases 1AK4_7,3CPH_7 and 1HE8_3 in protein docking.
Figure 7: Optimization and uncertainty performance of UA-L2O with different λ in three non-convex testfunctions. Different row represents different functions, and each column stands for: (i) 1st column is OPtimiza-tion performance, lower the better; (ii) 2nd column is precision of the estimated confidence, lower denotingmore accurate posterior estimation; (iii) 3rd is the length of the confidence interval: only when with similarprecision of the estimated confidence would a tighter interval indicating more certain solutions.
Figure 9: The corresponding confidence intervals to results in Figure 3, a secondary metric and tie-breaker foruncertainty calibration accuracy and a measure of the length of the confidence interval: only when the estimatedconfidence levels are similarly precise, tighter intervals indicates higher certainty about solutionsFigure 8: Estimated posterior distributions, confidence intervals and ground truth solutions for cases 1AHW_3and 1JMO_4 in protein docking.
Figure 8: Estimated posterior distributions, confidence intervals and ground truth solutions for cases 1AHW_3and 1JMO_4 in protein docking.
Figure 10: Scatter plot of confidence for solution regions segmented by ∣∣x* — X∣∣2, versus the correspondingoptimization performance ∣∣x* -XtrUe k 2 in three test functions. The peak closer to left side indicates the solutionpopulations are in high confidence if they are closer to the optima.
Figure 11: Scatter plot of confidence for solution regions segmented by ∣∣x* — X∣2, versus the correspondingoptimization performance ∣∣x* — XtrUek2 in data privacy attack.
