Figure 1: The landscape of a ReLUnetwork with two inputs (X1 , X2).
Figure 2: Top Left: The entries of the Hessian are treated as arms. Bottom Left: Illustration of thenotations used in Algorithm 1. This is a snapshot taken at iteration t, where the colored solid barand the red dashed bar are the true mean reward and the current estimate for each arm, respectively.
Figure 3: Parametric ACE model.
Figure 4:	Visualization of the transformations in F10 (left) and F3 (right).
Figure 5:	Heat maps of interaction strengths for Cal housing, Parkinsons, and Drug combination data.
Figure 6: The MATLAB symbol. (a)Imagine the MATLAB symbol as the landscape of a functionF(x1 , x2), there is no interaction locally in the flat region, but x1 and x2 interact globally, i.e., thereis no global decomposition as F(x1 , x2) = a(x1) + b(x2). (b) (Problems with analytical evaluation)The function is approximated by a PLNN, and the landscape is spliced by flat facets. The Hessianmatrix is a zero matrix on almost every point (no local interaction), but x1 and x2 still interactglobally.
Figure 7: Average ROC-AUC score versus hi(j) on synthetic datasets. The error bar represents onestandard deviation (5 folds).
Figure 8: The ROC-AUC scores obtained for 10 synthetic datasets under different configurations ofperturbation size h (horizontal axis), and the number of evaluations on each interaction pair (verticalaxis). We expect that given the fixed perturbation size h, the ROC-AUC scores will rise as the numberof evaluations increases. This is consistent with the observation that the bricks are brighter fromtop to bottom. Also, we observed that with a properly chosen h ∈ [0.6, 0.9], the interactions can becorrectly detected with a relatively small number of evaluations (the bricks are brighter in the middle,see dataset 3, 4, and 5).
Figure 9: The nodes (features) are clustered correctly. The color of edges indicates pairwise interactionstrength. Nodes with the same color belong to the same cluster.
Figure 10: Heat maps of pairwise interaction strength proposed by our method for functions F1-F10(Table 4). Cross-marks indicate the ground truth interactions.
Figure 11:	Left: Heat maps of pairwise interaction strengths on real datasets. Right: Confidenceinterval for each interaction pair. The green, orange, blue points denote the UCB, estimated mean,and LCB respectively.
Figure 12:	Heat maps of pairwise interaction strengths for drug combination data. The top 34 detectedinteractions are listed, among which 15 of them (marked in red) are verified in the DrugBank (Wishartet al., 2018).
Figure 13:	Performance comparison on synthetic datasets while reducing the number of trainingsamples. For each dataset, we tried different training data 5 times in one experiment, and theperformances (of ten experiments) were all tested on the same test set. The error bar shows themaximal and minimal test NRMSE in 5 folds.
Figure 14:	Performance comparison on both the synthetic and real datasets while reducing the percentof weights retained by the LTH. The error bar shows the maximal and minimal test NRMSE in 5folds.
