Figure 1: FNNS workflow: Alice (sender) encodes the message M into image X such thatF(X) =M ; Bob (receiver) decodes the message with the same decoder F . Alice generates perturbed image〜 .~ .
Figure 2: Examples of cover and steganographic image pairs from MS-COCO and CelebA. In eachimage FNNS-D is used to hide 4 bpp. (Zoom in for image details.)conducive to hiding information in the images. As a result, the output image quality is better andthe optimization does not suffer from getting stuck in bad local optima.
Figure 3: An Example of artifactsthat arise when using an out-of-domainmodel. Left: original image; right:a steganographic image generated fromSteganoGAN.
Figure 4: The left column contains original im-ages. The middle column shows the result of re-placing the face with a fake face, which contains aencrypted form of the original face steganograph-ically hidden through FNNS. The right columnshows the image recovered by FNNS decoding theencrypted face, decrypting and re-inserting it.
Figure 5: Example of anonymizing multiple faces in an image. In this example each private face ishidden within the corresponding fake face that replaces it.
Figure 6: Pipeline for FNNS face anonymization.
Figure 7:	Examples of images with different amounts of hidden information. The first two imagesare from CelebA, the next two are from Div2k and the last two are from MS-COCO. PSNR valuesvary mostly due to the randomness of the networks. For images with low PSNR values the qualityimproves with a re-initialized network.
Figure 8:	Examples of images with different amounts of hidden information. The first two imagesare from CelebA, the next two are from Div2k and the last two are from MS-COCO.
Figure 9:	Examples of images with different amounts of hidden information. The first two imagesare from CelebA, the next two are from Div2k and the last two are from MS-COCO. As seen inrow 1 or row 4, the color of the image changes sometimes. This is because the trained Steganogannetwork learns that information can be hidden by changing the color and maintaining the structure.
Figure 10: Error rates (%) of 3 bits based onvarious widths and depths. We calculate theerror rate on average over 100 images fromDiv2k. The lower the better.
