Figure 1: Structure of the Deep Stochastic Koopman Operator (DeSKO). With the help of twoneural networks, the DeSKO model encodes the system state xt into the parameters of a Gaussiandistribution of observables, which are the mean vector μθ (Xt) and the variance vector o§ (Xt). Then,the learned Koopman matrix A and control matrix B propagate the distribution to the next time step.
Figure 2: Cumulative prediction error on the validation set. The Y-axis indicates the cumulativemean-squared prediction error in log space over 16 time-steps and the X-axis indicates the trainingtime steps. The shadowed region shows the confidence interval (one standard deviation) over 10random seeds.
Figure 3: State trajectories (a-g) and mean-square tracking error (h). The y-axis indicates the averagestate trajectory (a-g) or tracking error (h) and the x-axis indicates the time steps in each episode. Theshadowed region shows the confidence interval (one standard deviation) over ten random seeds. In(a-g), only the dimensions where a reference signal is tracked are shown.
Figure 4: Death rate and cumulative tracking error in the presence of persistent disturbances withdifferent magnitudes. The x-axis indicates the magnitude of the applied disturbances. The y-axisindicates the death rate in the CartPole systems (a-c) and the cumulative tracking error in log space inGRN systems (d-e). All of the trained policies are evaluated for 100 trials in each setting.
Figure 5: AblationEstUdy on the Entropythreshold H.
Figure 6:	Snapshot of the environments. The CartPole and HaflCheetah are simulated in OpenAIgym. The SoPrA soft robotic arm is visualized using Drake.
Figure 7:	Configuration space of the two-segment soft robotic arm SoPrA, reproduced from Toshim-itsu et al. (2021). θi describes the curvature for each bending segment i. ψi describes the relativeangle of the plane of bending for a segment i. mi is the mass of segment i.
Figure 8: A snapshot of the natural oscillatory behavior of a GRN system consisting of 3 genes.
Figure 9: Zoomed-out view of subfigure (f) in Figure 4. As shown above, the tracking error of DKOcontroller is significantly fragile to disturbances.
Figure 10: Cumulative prediction error on the validation set. The Y-axis indicates the cumulativemean-squared prediction error in log space over 16 time-steps and the X-axis indicates the trainingtime steps. The shadowed region shows the confidence interval (one standard deviation) over 10random seeds.
Figure 11: Mean-square traCking error. The y-axis indiCates the traCking error and the x-axis indiCatesthe time steps taken during training. The shadowed region shows the ConfidenCe interval (one standarddeviation) over ten random seeds.
Figure 12: Snapshot of the real SoPrA arm.
Figure 13: Cumulative prediction error on the validation set. The Y-axis indicates the cumulativemean-squared prediction error in log space over 16 time-steps and the X-axis indicates the trainingtime steps. The shadowed region shows the confidence interval (one standard deviation) over 10random seeds.
Figure 14: TrajeCtory traCking with DeSKO and DKO. The above figures show the end-point positionof the SoPrA arm on the x-y plane, Controlled by the DeSKO and DKO Controllers to traCk the givenletter trajeCtories.
