Figure 1: Schematic illustration of our proposed method, which comprises a CNN to learn an inversemapping and a differentiable operator to approximate the forward modeling of PDE.
Figure 2: An example of (a) a velocity map and (b) seismic measurements (named shot gather ingeophysics) and the 1D time-series signal recorded by a receiver.
Figure 3: Unsupervised UPFWI (ours) vs. Supervised H-PGNN+ (Sun et al., 2021). Our methodachieves better performance, e.g. lower Mean Squared Error (MSE) and higher Structural Similar-ity (SSIM), when involving more unlabeled data (>24k).
Figure 4: Comparison of different methods on inverted velocity maps of FlatFault (top) andCurvedFault (bottom). For FlatFault, our UPFWI-48K reveals more accurate details at layerboundaries and the slope of the fault in deep region. For CurvedFault, our UPFWI reconstructsthe geological anomalies on the surface that best match the ground truth.
Figure 5: Comparison of UPFWI with different loss functions on (a) waveform residual andtheir corresponding inversion results (ground truth provided in the first column), and (b) single traceresiduals recorded by the receiver at 525 m offset. Our UPFWI trained with pixel-wise loss ('1 +'2distance) and perceptual loss yields the most accurate results. Best viewed in color.
Figure 6: More examples of velocity maps and their corresponding seismic measurements in Open-FWI dataset.
Figure 7: Comparison of different methods on inverted velocity maps of FlatFault. The detailsrevealed by our UPFWI are highlighted.
Figure 8: Comparison of different methods on inverted velocity maps of CurvedFault. The detailsrevealed by our UPFWI are highlighted.
Figure 9: Results of low-resolution Marmousi Dataset. This dataset contains low-resolution ve-locity maps generated using style tranfer with the Marmousi velocity map as the style images. OurUPFWI model yields good results in shallow regions, and it also captures some geological structuresin deeper regions. Similar phenomenon is also observed in the prediction of the smoothed Marmousivelocity map (bottom-right corner).
Figure 10: Results of salt bodies dataset. This dataset contains more complicated velocity maps.
Figure 11: Results of UPFWI with different network architectures. We replace the CNN in ourmodel with Vision Transformer (ViT) and MLP-Mixer as the encoder and test them on the FlatFaultdataset. Both models yield reasonable velocity maps. This demonstrates that our proposed learningparadigm is model-agnostic.
Figure 12: Results of adding Gaussian noise to FlatFault. The model is trained on the clean data(without noise) and tested on different levels (PSNR) of Gaussian noises. Clearly, our method isrobust to the noise although slight degradation is observed when noise level increases.
Figure 13: Results of adding Gaussian noise to CurvedFault. The model is trained on the cleandata (without noise) and tested on different levels (PSNR) of Gaussian noises. Similar to the resultsof FlatFault, our method is robust to the noise although slight degradation is observed when noiselevel increases.
Figure 14: Results of randomly missing traces on FlatFault. The model is trained on the cleandata (without missing traces) and tested on multiple missing rates from 5% to 25%. Our method isrobust to the missing traces. Although the higher missing rate leads to shifts in velocity values, thegeological structures are well preserved.
Figure 15: Results of randomly missing traces on CurvedFault. The model is trained on the cleandata (without missing traces) and tested on multiple missing rates from 5% to 25%. Similar to theresults of FlatFault, our method is robust to the missing traces. Although the higher missing rateleads to shifts in velocity values, the geological structures are well preserved.
Figure 16: Results on generalization across datasets. The test is performed on FlatFault by apply-ing a UPFWI model that is trained on CurvedFault dataset. Although the artifact is not negligible,the fault structures and velocity values are well preserved. This demonstrates that our model hasgeneralizability to a certain degree.
Figure 17: Results on generalizability over geological anomalies. The test is performed on adataset where we add additional geological anomalies to simulate time-lapse imaging problems.
