Figure 1: Example of fragile attributions. Highlighted red words are deemed most important towards thepredicted class by the Integrated Gradients attribution method, blue ones against it. By substituting a fewwords in the original sample, the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of word importances drops to below0.2 while maintaining the same confidence in the correctly predicted class (denoted by F).
Figure 2:	Robustness of attribution maps on several architectures and explainers. We plot the average cor-relations (PCC, ROC, SCC) (left), the Top-10%, Top-30% and Top-50% intersections (middle), the semanticsimilarity and increase of average perplexity (right) as functions of the perturbed ratio ρ. Dashed lines indicatethe metrics for our Random Attack (RA). The ACC indicates the area under the PCC ( ∙ and - e- ) curve,lower values correspond to overall lower feature attribution correlations in the overall operation interval of ρ.
Figure 3:	Ablation study of TEF. We compare the PCC of TEF, RA, the RandomImportance (RI) attackand the RandomSynonym (RS) attack. We find that RI behaves slightly worse than TEF, while RS behavesslightly better than RA in terms of reducing attribution correlation over all ρ values.
Figure 4: Estimated robustness of BERT attention weights on different layers (X-axis) and heads (Y-axis) forρmax = 0.2. Red cells indicate average PCC values close to 0, hence less robust attention head weights, whilewhite cells have average PCCs close to 1. Attention heads in later layers tend to be less robust, while headswithin a layer seem equally robust in most layers.
Figure 5: Transfer capabilities of TEF to other models and explanation methods. The lines indicate the es-timated PCC of TEF perturbations transferred from the indicated models and explanations. —and ∣	∣indicate the PCC curve of optimal TEF and RA perturbations respectively, without transfer.
Figure 6: Semi-universal attack policies for different datasets.
Figure 7: Average PCC of the indicated architectures and explainers after applying the semi-universal pertur-bations (Semi-uni.), compared to TEF and RA attacks. The semi-universal attack successfully decreases thecorrelation of original and attacked attribution maps.
