Figure 1: (a) EEG elec-trode placement in thestandard 10-20 system.
Figure 2: (a) ROC curves ofmedian models for seizure de-tection. (b) Confusion matri-ces (averaged across five ran-dom runs) for the baselines andDist-DCRNN without and withself-supervised pre-training for12-s seizure classification. Eachrow of the confusion matrices isnormalized by dividing by thenumber of examples in the cor-responding class, such that eachrow sums up to one.
Figure 3: Occlusion maps forseizure detection obtained fromCorr-DCRNN model for (a)-(b)focal, and (c)-(d) generalizedseizures. In each subfigure, leftpanel shows the occlusion mapfor 12-s when a seizure occursand right panel shows the occlu-sion map values averaged alongtime and overlaid on the corre-sponding correlation graph.
Figure 4: Distributions of (a)-(b) coverage and (c)-(d) localization scores for DenSe-CNN andDCRNNS on correctly predicted 60-s EEG clips for focal and generalized seizures. (e)-(f) Exampleocclusion maps with focal seizure whose localization >0.9 from pre-trained Corr-DCRNN. Onlyregions with normalized occlusion value >0.5 are colored. Red boxes are annotated seizure regions.
Figure 5: Confusion matrices (averaged across five random runs) of focal seizure classification on(a) 60-s EEG clips, and (b) 12-s EEG clips. All models fail to distinguish well among thesefocal seizure types, supporting our decision of merging these seizure types into one combined focalseizure class. Note that each row of the confusion matrices is normalized by dividing by the numberof examples in the corresponding class, such that each row sums up to one.
Figure 6: Example occlusion maps for seizure detection obtained from baseline Dense-CNN on cor-rectly predicted 60-s clips for (a)-(b) focal seizures, and (c)-(d) generalized seizures. Red boxesindicate the duration of the seizures. Note that the values within an occlusion map are normalized,and thus should not be compared across different occlusion maps.
Figure 7: Example occlusion maps for seizure classification obtained from pre-trained Corr-DCRNNmodel for (a)-(b) combined focal (CF) seizures, (C) generalized non-specific (GN) seizure, (d)absence (AB) seizure, and (e) combined tonic (CT) seizure. In each subfigure, the bottom panelshows the occlusion values for each channel replicated along the time dimension and overlaid on60-s EEG signals, the red boxes indicate the duration of seizures in the EEG clips, and the top panelshows the occlusion values overlaid on the correlation graph structure. To visualize occlusion mapvalues in this “double banana” montage, we subtract the occlusion values between the correspondingchannels in the montage, which results in different values between occlusion maps shown on theEEG signals (bottom panel in each subfigure) and that shown on the graph structures (top panel ineach subfigure). Note that the values within an occlusion map are normalized, and thus should notbe compared across different occlusion maps.
Figure 8: Distance graphs with different threshold κ in the thresholded Gaussian kernel. Smallthresholds (e.g., 0.7 and 0.8) result in missing edges between nearby electrodes, whereas largethresholds (e.g., 1.0, 1.1, 1.2) result in edges connecting electrodes that are spatially far away.
Figure 9: Distance-based graphs constructed using Gaussian kernels with different bandwidths.
