Figure 1: Anytime inference produces a pro-gression of outputs.
Figure 2: Our anytime dense prediction with confidence (ADP-C) approach. We equip the modelwith intermediate exits for anytime inference. We redesign each exit with encoder-decoder archi-tecture to compensate for spatial resolution across model stages. At each exit’s output, sufficientlyconfident predictions (green squares) are identified to skip further computation in the following lay-ers.
Figure 3: Accuracy (y) and computation (x) at four exits across architectures (HRNet-W48/W32/W18) and tasks (semantic segmentation and pose estimation). Anytime performanceimproves with higher y (more accuracy) and lower x (less computation). Redesigned heads (RH)boost the accuracy at early exits, while confidence adaptivity (CA) reduces computation by up tomore than half. Our method outperforms baseline methods (MDEQ and Feature-based StochasticSampling) across the accuracy-computation tradeoff curve.
Figure 4: Top: prediction results at all exits. Middle: confidence maps, lighter color (yellow)indicates higher confidence. Bottom: correct/wrong predictions at the exit drawn as white/black.
Figure 5: Left: comparing downsampling strategies. D = 3/2/1 means downsampling the features3/2/1 times at exit 1/2/3. Right: comparison between different masking criteria.
Figure 6: Input and ground truth of the example validation images visualized in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8We present more visualizations of the same type as Fig. 4 in the main paper, in Fig. 7 and 8. Theirinput and ground truth are shown in Fig. 6 in the same order. We can see the same trend as discussedin the main paper still holds: the model will mask out confident points that are inside large segments(e.g., road, vegetable), which are mostly already predicted correctly in early exits.
Figure 7: Top: prediction results at all exits. Middle: confidence maps, lighter color (yellow)indicates higher confidence. Bottom: correct/wrong predictions at the exit drawn as white/black.
Figure 8: Top: prediction results at all exits. Middle: confidence maps, lighter color (yellow)indicates higher confidence. Bottom: correct/wrong predictions at the exit drawn as white/black.
Figure 9: Cityscapes prediction results for MDEQ-Small all various iterations. Input and groundtruth are in Fig. 6.
Figure 10: Cityscapes prediction results for MDEQ-Small all various iterations. Input and groundtruth are in Fig. 6.
