Figure 1: The effect of α and β on πR (Equation 4).
Figure 2: The effect of α and β on E[|z|] (Equation 4). We give the expected coalition size as aproportion of the bag size, i.e., E[|z|]/k.
Figure 3: An example of the identification of key instances for the 4-MNIST-Bags experiment. Thetop row shows the attention value for each instance, and bottom three rows show the output of MILLIfor classes three, two, and one respectively (green = support, red = refute).
Figure 4: The effect of sample size on interpretability performance for the MI-Attn model. Weprovide the results of the same study but for the other MIL models in Appendix A.9.
Figure A1: The effect of sample size on interpretability performance for MI-Net.
Figure A2: The effect of sample size on interpretability performance for mi-Net.
Figure A3: The effect of sample size on interpretability performance for MI-GNN.
Figure A4: The interpretability output for a class two bag on the 4-MNIST-Bags experiment. Thetop row shows the attention value for each instance, and bottom two rows show the output of MILLIfor classes two and zero respectively (green = support, red = refute). We can see that both Attentionand MILLI have identified the 9s as important, but only MILLI is able to also say that the 9s supportclass two and refute class zero.
Figure A5: The interpretability output for a class one bag on the 4-MNIST-Bags experiment. Wecan see that both Attention and MILLI have identified the 8s as important, but only MILLI is able toalso say that the 8s support class one and refute class zero. Also note that the colours are less strongfor the final 8 — the digit is partially obscured, so the model is less confident.
Figure A6: The interpretability output for two examples of the cokecan class in the SIVAL dataset.
Figure A7: The interpretability output for two examples of the dataminingbook class in the SIVALdataset. Again, the interpretations show the model is relying heavily on the colour orange as an indi-cator of the object’s location, as it also picks up on the similar colours in the background, includingthe reflection of the book in the table.
Figure A8: The interpretability output for two examples of the goldmedal class in the SIVAL dataset.
Figure A9: The interpretability output for two examples of the wd40can class in the SIVAL dataset.
