Figure 1: The visualized results on the inter-twining moon dataset. The plots presented in the first tworows correspond to the visualized vector fields for the posterior scores of the class c1 (upper crescent)and c2 (lower crescent), respectively. The plots in the third row are the sampled points. Differentcolumns correspond to different experimental settings in Section 3. The detailed configurations arepresented in Appendix A.6.2.
Figure 2: The training procedure of the proposed methodology.
Figure 3: A comparison of thecurated samples generated viathe base method and the scalingmethod. As for the uncurated visu-alized samples, please refer to Ap-pendix A.7.4.
Figure 4: The sorted differences between the proposed method and the base method evaluated on theCifar-10 and Cifar-100 datasets for the class-wise P / R / D / C metrics. Each colored bar in the plotsrepresents the differences between our method and the base method evaluated using one of the P / R /D / C metrics for a certain class. A positive difference represents that our method outperforms thebase method for that class.
Figure 5: The evaluation curves of (a) thescore errors and (b) the cross entropy duringthe training iterations for LCE, LDLSM0, andLTotal . The curves depict the mean and 95%confidence interval of five times of training.
Figure A1: The original and the renormalized densities under different choices of α.
Figure A2: An illustration for different conditional score-based data generation methods in Sec-tion A.4.
Figure A3: The uncurated examples generated using the base method on the Cifar-10 dataset.
Figure A4: The uncurated examples generated using the scaling method on the Cifar-10 dataset.
Figure A5: The uncurated examples generated using our筹 HL 超9≡ħr≡q骞^≡-^≡R除9ħbλw≡≡≡∙S qBW Srismethod on the Cifar-10 dataset.
Figure A6: The uncurated examples of classes ‘baby’, ‘apple’, ‘aquarium fish’, and ‘beargenerated’using the base method, the scaling method, and our method on the Cifar-100 dataset.
