Figure 1: An overview of the Zest approach to computing the distance between two black-boxclassifiers C1 and C2 . Phase 1 randomly samples several reference images. Phase 2 segments thereference images into components and their location masks using a segmentation model. Phase 3approximates the local decision boundaries around each reference image by training a LIME modelthat takes mask locations as input and predicts the classifiers response on these images’ components.
Figure 2: The distance computed by Zest for unrelated classifiers (Cr(etf) versus Cunrelated) and related(t)	(t+k)classifiers (Cref versus Cref ) as a function of training epoch, t. We consider k = 5 for the relatedclassifier. See Appendix D for the results of other k values. The distance of related classifiers issignificantly smaller than the Zest distance of unrelated classifiers, especially as training converges.
Figure 3: Influence of the reference set size and sampling stochasticity on the distance computed byZest. The average Zest distances of different reference sets are similar, while the standard deviationdecreases as the size of the reference set increases.
Figure 4: Evaluation of correctness of Zest in the text and audio domains respectively: this figureis plotted in a similar manner to Figure 2, i.e., the distances between related and unrelated classifierpairs are plotted as a function of training epoch, t. We can see the Zest distance of related classifiersare significantly smaller than distances of unrelated classifiers across domains.
Figure 5: The distance between a victim classifier and its extracted copy obtained by Zest as afunction of training epochs of the latter. Zest can detect the extracted copy of the victim classifier.
Figure 6: Distances between the original classifier and (1) a directly unlearned classifier, (2) anapproximately unlearned classifier when data to be unlearned serves as the reference set in Zest.
Figure 7: Impact of the value of k on the Zest distances between related models: We vary the valueof k and plot the distances between a model at training epoch t and itself after training for another kepochs for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets respectively.
Figure 8:	Re-plotting Figure 2 using '1 and '2 distances.
Figure 9:	Re-plotting Figure 5 using '1 and '2 distances.
Figure 10: Re-plotting Figure 6 using '1 and '2 distances.
