Figure 1: As a motivating example, we introduce two topology-based data sets whose graphs canbe easily distinguished by humans; the left data set can be trivially classified by all topology-based methods, while the right data set necessitates learnable topological features. We show theperformance of (i) a GCN with k layers, (ii) our layer TOGL (integrated into a GCN with k - 1layers): GCN-TOGL, (iii) the WeisfeiIer-Lehman (WL) graph kernel using vertex degrees as thenode features, and (iv) a method based on static topological features (PH). Next to the performancecharts, we display examples of graphs of each class for each of the data sets.
Figure 2: Overview of TOGL, our topological graph layer. a) The node attributes x(v) ∈ Rd of graphG serve as input. b) A network Φ maps x(v) to k node values {a(1v) , . . . , a(kv) } ⊂ R. c) Applying Φkto the attributes of each vertex v results in k views of G. d) A vertex filtration fi is computed for theith view of G. e) A set of k persistence diagrams is encoded via the embedding function Ψ, whereΨ[v] denotes the embedding of vertex v. f) The embedded topological features are combined withthe input attributes x(v). g) Finally, this yields X(V) ∈ Rd, which acts as a new node representationaugmented with multi-scale topological information.
Figure 3: Classification performance whenanalysing the structural variant of MNIST.
Figure S4: Performance comparison on synthetic data sets as a function of the number of GCN layersor Weisfeiler-Lehman iterations. This is an extended version of Figure 1. For TOGL, we show theperformance with respect to the dimensionality of topological features that are being used. Since thestandard deviations are negligible, we refrain from showing them here.
Figure S5:	Example graphs of the benchmark data sets that describe molecular structures. Thesegraphs give rise to complex topological structures that can be exploited.
Figure S6:	Example graphs of the benchmark data sets that correspond to extracted social networks.
Figure S7:	Examples of different filtrations jointly learnt on an example graph randomly picked fromthe DD data set. The width of each node dot is proportional to its node degree, the colour saturationis proportional to the filtration value.
Figure S8: Comparison of test accuracy for the structure-based variants of the benchmark data setswhile varying network depth, i.e. the number of GCN layers. Error bars denote the standard deviationof test accuracy over 10 cross-validation folds. Interaction refers to using a DeepSets approachfor embedding persistence diagrams, whereas no interaction uses persistence diagrams coordinatefunctions that do not account for pairwise interactions.
