Figure 1: Description of the the task and the system - A. A time-series of low-resolution images,simulating a sequence of frames generated by a sensor moving in a static scene, is fed to the networkone-by-one following the order of acquisition, along with optional position information; the networkintegrates the information from the whole sequence of images and outputs a class. A sample tra-jectory composed of T = 3 steps (orange → red → blue) is illustrated on the full resolution imagetogether with the corresponding 3 generated frames. B. Network architecture and training proce-dure: Teacher is a feed-forward convolutional neural network, e.g., ResNet50 or Small-net. Studentis a multilayer recurrent convolutional neural network. At the first phase of training, Student’sbottom layers (DRC-FE) are trained to reproduce teacher’s features. These features are extractedfrom the teacher at the layer where the teacher’s spatial resolution corresponds to the student’s in-put resolution. The top shared layers (DRC-BE) are then fine-tuned to improve the accuracy of thelow-resolution task. See main text for more details.
Figure 2: Spatial and temporal receptive fields in the top recurrent layer - A. Examples ofsix pairs of teacher (high-resolution, left) and student (low-resolution, right) feature AM. Note thevisual resemblance between the teacher’s and student’s features and the dynamical nature of thestudent’s features. The arrow illustrates time flow. B. Central plot: the values along the X- (andresp. the Y-)axis represent the activation values in constrained maximization setting when limitingthe DGN to purely temporal (resp. spatial) changes. The size and the color of the dots representthe intensity of activity in the full unconstrained (spatio-temporal) maximization. Call-outs depictpredominantly temporal (bottom-right dot), predominantly spatial (top-left dot), and mixed spatio-temporal (center-left dot) selectivity. Rows correspond to spatio-temporal (ST), purely spatial (S),and purely temporal (T) maximization. Columns correspond to timesteps where eight timesteps outof ten are shown for visual clarity.
Figure 3: Sensor’s trajectory and its impact on performance. Top: representative examples oftrajectories are shown for 5-time steps long trajectories with gradually increasing curvature, whichcorresponds to decreasing κ (Equation 1). Spiral trajectories governed by Equation 2 are also shown.
