Figure 1: The two basic concepts from persistent homology important for our method. (a) Persistenthomology quantifies topological changes in a filtration, i.e., a changing sequence of simplicial com-plexes ordered by inclusion, parameterized by a time parameter α ∈ R. Intuitively, the parameterα determines the scale at which points become connected (see Definition A.0.1 in Appendix A fora formal definition of the α-complex). Various topological holes are either born or die when α in-creases. The filtration starts with one connected component per point (0-dimensional holes), whichcan only merge together (resulting in their death) when including additional edges. For larger α,we observe the birth of cycles (1-dimensional holes, here, ‘white spaces enclosed by edges’), whichget filled in (and thus die) when α increases further. Eventually, one connected component persistsindefinitely. (b) Persistent homology is commonly visualized through persistence diagrams. Here,two are plotted on top of each other (H0 and H1). A tuple (b, d) marks a hole—here a connectedcomponent (H0) or cycle (H1)—born at time b that dies at (possibly infinite) time d in the filtration.
Figure 2: The data set in Figure 1a, optimized to have a low total 0-dimensional persistence. Pointsare colored according to their initial grouping along one of the four letters in the ‘ICLR’ acronym.
Figure 3: A point cloud topologically optimized for (at least) two clusters, without and with sam-pling. Optimization with sampling encourages topological holes to be represented by more points.
Figure 4: Various representations of the synthetic data, colored by ground truth circular coordinates.
Figure 5: Feature importance densities of the 498 irrelevant features in the PCA embedding (blue),the top. optimized PCA embedding (orange), and the top. regularized PCA embedding (green).
Figure 7: Various representations of the bifurcating cell data. Colors represent the cell grouping.
Figure 8: The Karate network and various of its embeddings.
Figure 9: An example of six simplicial complexes ∆α (X) in the α-filtration filtration of a pointcloud data set X resembling the ‘ICLR’ conference acronym in the Euclidean plane. α = ∞ isinformally used to denote the complex that contains all simplices, which here equals the Delaunaytriangulation, and will necessarily be identical to ∆α (X) for some finite α ∈ R>0.
Figure 10: The diagrams D0 (black points, H0) and D1 (red points, H1) for the α-filtration filtrationof the point cloud data set in Figure 9, plotted on top of each other. The six highly elevated points(encircled in blue) identify the presence of four connected components (H0), corresponding to the‘I’, ‘C’, ‘L’, and ‘R’ letters in the conference acronym, and two cycles (H1), corresponding to thehole in the letter ‘R’ (born earlier) and composed between the letters ‘R’ and ‘C’ (born later).
Figure 11: The major connected component in the Harry Potter graph. Edges mark friendly rela-tionships between characters.
Figure 12: Various embeddings of the Harry Potter graph and the circular model therein.
Figure 13: Automated pseudotime inference of real cell cycle data through persistent homology,from the PCA embedding of the data.
Figure 14: Automated pseudotime inference of real cell cycle data through persistent homology,from the topologically regularized PCA embedding of the data.
Figure 15: The topologically regularized PCA embedding of the cell cycle data set from the mainpaper and Section B.2, for varying sampling hyperparameters fS (the sampling fraction) and nS(the number of repeats). Note that the embeddings in the bottom row are all identical to nS = 1.
Figure 16: Total computation time of the topologically regularized embedding in seconds (ran for1000 epochs as in the main paper), by sampling fraction fS and number of repeats nS . Note that forfS = 1 it is unnecessary to consider nS > 1, and the computation time is constant over nS . There-fore, computation times for fS = 1 and nS > 1 are also not included in the left plot, as they maygive a deceptive view. During each step of the topologically regularized embedding optimization,the topological loss function is computed over 264fS points, repeatedly when specified so by nS .
Figure 17: The topologically regularized UMAP embeddings of the bifurcating real single cell datapresented in the main paper according to (8), for various functional thresholds τ.
Figure 18: The topologically regularized UMAP embeddings of the bifurcating real single cell datapresented in the main paper according to (8), for various values of p.
Figure 19: Various topologically regularized embeddings of the 500-dimensional synthetic data Xfor which the ground truth model is a circle, as presented in the main paper. (Left to Right) Thetopological loss function used for topological regularization of the PCA embedding equals the lossfunction formulated in Table 5 (Top to Bottom).
Figure 20: Topologically regularized and optimized UMAP embeddings of the bifurcating cell data,using potentially wrong prior topological (circular) information.
Figure 21: Topologically regularized UMAP embeddings of the bifurcating cell data, using poten-tially wrong prior topological (circular) information, for various topological regularization strengthsλtop. For λtop = 10, the plot—which is included for easy comparison—is identical to the right plotin Figure 20a.
Figure 22: Evolution of the UMAP embedding and topological loss functions during optimizationof the topologically regularized embeddings according to the number of epochs, for various topo-logical regularization strengths λtop . The regularization strengths are not factored in the plottedtopological loss functions for easy comparison. Thus, the topological loss functions directly equalthe persistence of the most prominent cycle in each embedding.
