Figure 1:	Illustration of the THOMAS multi-agent prediction pipelineneighborhood of the drivable area. Finally, none of these previous methods considers the problemsof scene consistency for multi-agent prediction.
Figure 2:	Model architecture for multi-agent prediction with shared backbone3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 3: Hierarchical iterative refinement of the grid probabilities. First, the full grid is evaluatedat a very low resolution, then the highest cells are up-sampled and evaluated at a higher resolution,until final resolution is reached. We highlight in grey the restricted area considered for refinement ateach step.
Figure 3: Hierarchical iterative refinement of the grid probabilities. First, the full grid is evaluatedat a very low resolution, then the highest cells are up-sampled and evaluated at a higher resolution,until final resolution is reached. We highlight in grey the restricted area considered for refinement ateach step.
Figure 4: Illustration of THOMAS methods for generation of scene-consistent agent modalities3.2 Modality recombination for multi-agent consistent predictionThe difficulty in multimodal multi-agent prediction resides in having coherent modalities betweeneach agent. Since the modalities are considered scene-wise, each agent’s most probable modalityhas to match with the most probable prediction of the other agents, and so on. Moreover, thesemodalities must not collide with each other, as they should represent realistic scenarios.
Figure 5: Qualitative examples of recombination model assembling collision-free modalities to-gether compared to initial colliding modalities. For each example we display the general contextwith highlighted agents and area of interest, then two zooms in on the agents, one displaying theinitial best modality before recombination in dashed orange and all the other available modalities ingrey. The second zooms shows the best modality after recombination in full line orange.
Figure 6: Qualitative examples of recombination model selecting fewer but more pronounced andimpactful agent modalities compared to initial colliding modalities. For each example we displayon the left the vanilla model modalities with dashed lines, with the initial best modality in dashedorange and all the other available modalities in grey. On the right we display the selected modalitiesafter recombination, where the model focuses on the most likely occurrence in most agents.
Figure 7: Curve of MissRate6 with regard to inference time with varying number of points upsam-pled at the last hierarchical refinement iteration.
Figure 8: Detailed illustration of our heatmap generator model17Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022A.9 Heatmap qualitative resultsFigure 9: Qualitative examples of heatmap output from our multi-agent model. All the heatmapsfrom one scene are the results from one single forward pass in our model predicting all agentsat once. We use matching colors for the agent history, current location and their future predictedheatmap (best viewed in color).
Figure 9: Qualitative examples of heatmap output from our multi-agent model. All the heatmapsfrom one scene are the results from one single forward pass in our model predicting all agentsat once. We use matching colors for the agent history, current location and their future predictedheatmap (best viewed in color).
