Figure 1: Wisconsin Card Sorting Test for Machine Learners (WCST-ML). The training dataset (left) posesequally plausible cues to the DNN: color, shape, and scale. Which cue will a model f choose to use, whengiven such training data? By examining f ’s output on unbiased off-diagonal samples at test time (middle), onemay discover the cue f has adopted. In the example: 1-scale, 2-shape, and 3-color.
Figure 2: Dataset samples. The same set of images for each dataset accommodates two tasks, depending onthe labeling scheme (row-wise or column-wise). The diagonal dataset Ddiag (indicated with borders of color )is identical regardless of the row- or column-wise labeling. Left: DSprites. Right: UTKFace.
Figure 3: Preferential ordering of cues. Diagonal and unbiased accuracies of models trained on the diagonaltraining set Ddiag composed of the cues defined by S and tested on the off-diagonal sets Dk where k ∈ S.
Figure 4: 3-D visualisation of loss surface around different solution types Θ?.
Figure 5:	Basin of attraction. We initialize ResNet20 around solutions biased to each of the four cues inDSprites (upper row) and three cues in UTKFace (lower row). We report the averaged unbiased accuraciesfor models initialized with perturbed solutions θ? + v. The x-axes are the perturbation sizes kvk2. From theperturbed initial parameters, each model is trained for 50 epochs.
Figure 6:	Paths connecting Θp and Θa. We compute paths between preferred and averted solutions alongwhich the diagonal-dataset (Ddiag) loss is zero. On the leftmost column, we show the unbiased accuracies for thepreferred and averted cues along the path; we observe a bias shift in the middle in each case. The three rightmostcolumns visualize the loss values around the zero-loss paths (solid curves), with respect to the losses computedon diagonal Ddiag, preferred cue Dp , and averted cue Da datasets. The zero-loss paths are quadratic Beziercurves, parametrised by three dots shown in the plots: the two end points (preferred and averted solutions) anda third point that regulate the curve shape by “pulling” it. Inspired by Garipov et al. (2018).
