Figure 1: Examples of explainability methods applied to a melanoma classifier. Explanation by (a) heatmaps(e.g. [19, 47, 76, 79]), (b) segmentation masks (e.g. [22, 69]), (c) sample retrieval (e.g. [72]), (d) counterfactualgeneration (e.g. [68, 73]), (e) and multiple counterfactual generations such as DISSECT. Multiple counter-factuals could highlight several different ways that changes in a skin lesion could reveal its malignancy andovercome some of the blind spots of the other approaches. For example, they can demonstrate that large le-sions, jagged borders, and asymmetrical shapes lead to melanoma classification. They can also show potentialbiases of the classifier by revealing that surgical markings can spuriously lead to melanoma classification.
Figure 2:	Illustration of SynthDerm dataset that we algorithmically generated. Fitzpatrick scale of skinclassification based on melanin density and corresponding examples in the dataset are visualized.
Figure 3:	Examples from 3D Shapes. EPE and EPE-mod converge to finding the same concept, despiteEPE-mod’s ability to express multiple pathways to switch classifier outcomes from False to True. DISSECTdiscovers the two ground-truth concepts: CT1 flips the floor color to cyan and CT2 flips the shape color to red.
Figure 4: Examples from SynthDerm comparing DISSECT with the strongest baseline, EPE-mod. Weillustrate three queries with different Fitzpatrick ratings [20] and visualize the two most prominent conceptsfor each technique. We observe that EPE-mod converges on a single concept that only vaguely representsmeaningful ground-truth concepts. However, DISSECT successfully finds concepts describing asymmetricalshapes, jagged borders, and uneven colors that align with the ABCDE of melanoma [65]. DISSECT alsoidentifies concepts for surgical markings that spuriously impact the classifier’s decisions.
Figure 5: Examples from CelebA. A biased classifier has been trained to predict smile probability, where atraining dataset was sub-sampled so that smiling co-occurs only with “bangs” and “blond hair” attributes. EPEdoes not support multiple CTs. EPE-mod converges on the same concept, despite having the ability to expressvarious pathways to change f (x) through CT1 and CT2. However, DISSECT discovers distinct pathways: CT1mainly changes hair color to blond, and CT2 does not alter hair color but tries to add bangs.
Figure 6:	Simplified illustration of EPE, EPE-mod, and DISSECT. EPE-mod can be viewed as anablated version of DISSECT. Orange, Green, and Blue show elements related to the discrimina-tor, generator, and CT disentangler, respectively. The novelty of DISSECT is the disentanglementcomponents.
Figure 7:	Qualitative results on 3D Shapes when flipping classification outcome from “False” to“True." We observe that EPE-mod converges to finding the same concept, despite having the abilityto express multiple pathways to switch the classifier outcome. However, DISSECT can discover thetwo Distinct ground-truth concepts: CTi flips the floor color to cyan, and CT? converts the shapecolor to red.
Figure 8:	Qualitative results on 3D Shapes when flipping classification outcome from “True” to“False." We observe that EPE-mod converges to finding the same concept, despite having the abilityto express multiple pathways to switch the classifier outcome. However, DISSECT is capable ofdiscovering Distinct paths to do so. Left: When the input query has a red shape, but the floor coloris not cyan, CT1 flips the shape color to orange and Cr? flips it to violet. Middle: When the inputquery has a cyan floor, but the shape color is not red, CT1 flips the floor color to lime, and C?converts it to magenta. Right: When the input query has a red shape and cyan floor, CT1 changesthe shape color to dark orange and floor color to lime, and CT? flips the shape color to violet andfloor color to magenta.
Figure 9:	Qualitative results on CelebA. A biased classifier has been trained to predict smile prob-ability, where the training dataset has been sub-sampled such that smiling co-occurs only with“bangs” and “blond hair” attributes. EPE does not support multiple CTs. We observe that EPE-mod converges to finding the same concept, despite having the ability to express several pathways tochange f (x) through CTι and CT2. However, DISSECT can discover Distinct routes: CT1 mainlychanges hair color to blond, and CT2 does not alter hair color but focuses more on hairstyle and triesto add bangs. Thus it identifies two otherwise hidden biases.
