Figure 1: Neural network architectures. Left: standard architecture from previous literature. Thecentral module can be either fully-connected or relational layers. Outputs π(at) and Vt refer to theactor and critic respectively (Mnih et al., 2016). Right: proposed latent-goal architecture.
Figure 2: Left: a 7x7 Minecraft map (left) and its corresponding extended observation (right) withthe visual instruction “move through either soil or stone until reaching an axe or a sword”. Tasksare specified at the top of the extended observation by depicting objects and SATTL operators. Eachtile has a resolution of 9x9 pixels. Right: a 22x22 map in MiniGrid where the agent needs to “avoidorange lava until reaching a gray or dark-green key”. Instructions are given through a text channeland each tile has 8x8x3 pixels. Highlighted cells indicate the field of vision of the agent.
Figure 3: Results with OOD instructions in 500 maps (per size) of different dimensions. Sizes 14 and22 are OOD. MC refers Minecraft whereas MG to MiniGrid. Results show the average reward andstandard deviation from 10 independent runs (i.r.). Values are normalized so that 100 refers to thehighest performance achieved by the best run globally in maps of the given size and benchmark.
Figure 4: Results of 5 i.r. of vanilla BRIM (BRIM), BRIM with residual connections (ResBRIM),and with LGs (BRIMLG).
Figure 5: Ablation studies in Minecraft (5 i.r. per variant). PrediNetnLoGSub and PrediNetnLoGPos arevariants of PrediNetLG without the element-wise subtraction and the feature coordinates respectively.
Figure 6: Ablation studies with PrediNetLG in Minecraft (5 i.r. per variant). Left: Impact of differentbottleneck sizes. Right: Impact of having Ls task-agnostic or not.
Figure 7: Training plots of the networks studied in Sec 5. Continuous lines correspond to the50th percentiles while the shadowed areas are the 25th and 75th percentiles. Note that good trainperformances do not yield to similarly good test results as detailed in the main text. Left: Minecrafttraining plots. Right: MiniGrid plots. Note that the general performance drop at 20M in this settingis motivated by the higher chance of generating larger training maps from that point on.
Figure 8: Top: vanilla BRIM and ResBRIM (without and with the residual connection respectively).
Figure 9: Results with training instructions in 500 maps (per size) of different dimensions. Sizes 14and 22 are OOD.
Figure 10: Results of 5 i.r. of vanilla BRIM (BRIM), BRIM with residual connections (ResBRIM),and with LGs (BRIMLG).
Figure 11: Ablation studies with PrediNetLG in Minecraft (5 i.r. per variant). Left: Impact of differentbottleneck sizes. Right: Impact of having Ls task-agnostic or not.
