Figure 1: Overview of the proposed method. (1) x0 -→ xt by adding noise according to q(xt|x0).
Figure 2: The evolution of predictive performance of DDPM-based pixel-wise representations fordifferent UNet decoder blocks and diffusion steps. The blocks are numbered from the deep toshallow ones. The most informative features typically correspond to the later steps of the reversediffusion process and middle layers of the UNet decoder. The earlier steps correspond to uninfor-mative representations. The plots for other datasets are provided in Appendix ATimesteps	TimestepsFigure 3: The evolution of predictive performance of DDPM-based pixel-wise representations onthe LSUN-Horse dataset for classes with the smallest (Left) and largest (Right) average areas. Thepredictive performance for small-sized objects starts growing later in the reverse process. The deeperblocks are more informative for larger objects and the shallower blocks are more informative forsmaller objects. A similar evaluation for other datasets is provided in Appendix A.
Figure 3: The evolution of predictive performance of DDPM-based pixel-wise representations onthe LSUN-Horse dataset for classes with the smallest (Left) and largest (Right) average areas. Thepredictive performance for small-sized objects starts growing later in the reverse process. The deeperblocks are more informative for larger objects and the shallower blocks are more informative forsmaller objects. A similar evaluation for other datasets is provided in Appendix A.
Figure 4: Examples of k-means clusters (k=5) formed by the features extracted from the UNetdecoder blocks {6, 8, 10, 12} on the diffusion steps {50, 200, 400, 600, 800}. The clusters from themiddle blocks spatially span coherent semantic objects and parts.
Figure 5: The examples of segmentation masks predicted by our method on the test images alongwith the groundtruth annotated masks.
Figure 6: mIoU degradation for different image corruption levels on the Bedroom-28 and Horse-21datasets. DDPM demonstrates higher robustness and preserves its advantage for all distortion levels.
Figure 7: The evolution of predictive performance of DDPM-based pixel-wise representations fordifferent UNet blocks and diffusion steps on LSUN-Cat and LSUN-Bedroom. The blocks are num-bered from the deep to shallow ones.
Figure 8: The evolution of predictive performance of DDPM-based pixel-wise representations onthe FFHQ-256, LSUN-Cat and LSUN-Bedroom datasets for classes with the smallest (Left) andlargest (Right) average areas.
Figure 9: Per class IoUs for DatasetGAN, DatasetDDPM and DDPM.
Figure 10: Number of instances of each semantic class in the annotated real and synthetic train sets.
