Figure 1: (A) Existing automated data augmentation meth-ods with shallow augmentation policy followed by hand-picked transformations. (B) DeepAA with deep augmentationpolicy with no hand-picked transformations.
Figure 2: Top-1 test accuracy (%) on ImageNetof DeepAA-simple, DeepAA, and other automaticaugmentation methods on ResNet-50.
Figure 3: The distribution of operations at each layer of the policy for CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet. Theprobability of each operation is summed up over all 12 discrete intensity levels (see Appendix B and C) of thecorresponding transformation.
Figure 4: Illustration of the search trajectory of DeepAA in comparison with DeepTA on CIFAR-10.
Figure 5: The distribution of discrete magnitudes of each augmentation transformation in eachlayer of the policy for CIFAR-10/100. The x-axis represents the discrete magnitudes and the y-axisrepresents the probability. The magnitude is discretized to 12 levels with each transformation havingits own range. A large absolute value of the magnitude corresponds to high transformation intensity.
Figure 6: The distribution of discrete magnitudes of each augmentation transformation in each layerof the policy for ImageNet. The x-axis represents the discrete magnitudes and the y-axis representsthe probability. The magnitude is discretized to 12 levels with each transformation having its ownrange. A large absolute value of the magnitude corresponds to high transformation intensity. Notethat we do not show identity, autoContrast, invert, equalize, flips, Cutout and crop because they donot have intensity parameters.
Figure 7: Comparison of the policy of DeepAA and some publicly available augmentaiotn policyfound by other methods including AA, FastAA and DADA on CIFAR-10. Since the comparedmethods have varied numbers of augmentation layers, we cumulate the probability of each operationover all the augmentation layers. Thus, the cumulative probability can be larger than 1. For AA, FastAA and DADA, we add additional 1.0 probability to flip, Cutout and Crop, since they are applied bydefault. In addition, we normalize the magnitude to the range [-5, 5], and use color to distinguishdifferent magnitudes.
