Figure 1: Overview of SURF. (a) We leverage unlabeled experiences by generating pseudo-labels ybfrom the preference predictor Pψ in (1). To mitigate the negative effects from this semi-supervisedlearning, we only utilize pseudo-labels when the confidence of the predictor is higher than thresholdτ. (b) Given two segments (σ0, σ1), we generate augmented segments (σb0, σb1) by cropping thesubsequence from each segment.
Figure 2:	Learning curves on robotic manipulation tasks as measured on the success rate. The solidline and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across five runs.
Figure 3:	Learning curves on locomotion tasks as measured on the ground truth reward. The solidline and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across five runs.
Figure 4:	Ablation study on Walker-walk. (a) Contribution of each technique in SURF, i.e., semi-supervised learning (SSL) and temporal cropping (TC). (b) Effects of query size. (c) Comparison ofaugmentation methods. The results show the mean and standard deviation averaged over five runs.
Figure 5:	Hyperparameter analysis on Walker-walk using 100 preference queries. The results showthe mean and standard deviation averaged over five runs.
Figure 6:	Learning curves on locomotion tasks with pixel-based inputs as measured on the groundtruth reward. The solid line and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respec-tively, across five runs.
Figure 7: Rendered images of robotic manipulation tasks from Meta-world. Our goal is learningvarious locomotion and manipulation skills using preferences from a teacher.
Figure 8:	Contribution of each technique in SURF, i.e., semi-supervised learning (SSL) and temporalcropping (TC), in (a) Window Open, and (b) Hammer. The results show the mean and standarddeviation averaged over five runs.
Figure 9:	Analysis of the augmentation methods on Walker-walk task with 100 queries. (a) Com-parison of the augmentation methods, i.e., applying random amplitude scaling (RAS) or Gaussiannoise (GN) with temporal cropping (TC). (b) Comparison of the performance of PEBBLE with vary-ing augmentation intensity, i.e., cropping range. The results show the mean and standard deviationaveraged over five runs.
