Figure 1: (a) A Faster-RCNN (Ren et al., 2015) model trained on BDD-100k dataset (Yu et al., 2020) producesoverconfident predictions for OOD object (e.g., moose). (b)-(c) The uncertainty measurement with and withoutvirtual outlier training. The in-distribution data x ∈ X = R2 is sampled from a Gaussian mixture model).
Figure 2: The framework of VOS. We model the feature representation of ID objects as class-conditionalGaussians, and sample virtual outliers V from the low-likelihood region. The virtual outliers, along with theID objects, are used to produce the uncertainty loss for regularization. The uncertainty estimation branch(LunCertainty) isjointly trained with the object detection loss (LloC, Lcis).
Figure 3: UMAP vi-sualization of feature em-beddings of PASCAL-VOC(on a subset of 10 classes).
Figure 4: Visualization of detected objects on the OOD images (from MS-COCO) by a vanilla Faster-RCNN(top) and VOS (bottom). The in-distribution is BDD-100k dataset. Blue: Objects detected and classified as oneof the ID classes. Green: OOD objects detected by VOS, which reduce false positives among detected objects.
Figure 5: Additional visualization of detected objects on the OOD images (from MS-COCO) by a vanillaFaster-RCNN (top) and VOS (bottom). The in-distribution is Pascal VOC dataset. Blue: Objects detected andclassified as one of the ID classes. Green: OOD objects detected by VOS, which reduce false positives amongdetected objects.
Figure 6: Additional visualization of detected objects on the OOD images (from OpenImages) by a vanillaFaster-RCNN (top) and VOS (bottom). The in-distribution is Pascal VOC dataset. Blue: Objects detected andclassified as one of the ID classes. Green: OOD objects detected by VOS, which reduce false positives amongdetected objects.
Figure 7: Additional visualization of detected objects on the OOD images (from MS-COCO) by a vanillaFaster-RCNN (top) and VOS (bottom). The in-distribution is BDD-100k dataset. Blue: Objects detected andclassified as one of the ID classes. Green: OOD objects detected by VOS, which reduce false positives amongdetected objects.
Figure 8: Additional visualization of detected objects on the OOD images (from OpenImages) by a vanillaFaster-RCNN (top) and VOS (bottom). The in-distribution is BDD-100k dataset. Blue: Objects detected andclassified as one of the ID classes. Green: OOD objects detected by VOS, which reduce false positives amongdetected objects.
Figure 9: Visualization of learnable weight coefficient in the generalized energy score and the num-ber of training objects per in-distribution class. The value of the weight coefficient is averaged overthree different runs.
Figure 10: UMAP visualization of the synthesized virtual outliers. The blue points denote the objectfeatures from the in-distribution class of Person. The green points denote the synthesized virtualoutliers from the low-density space w.r.t the features from that class.
