Figure 1: Comparison of the approximated kΘ0(A)ktr following (12) using the three search spacesof NAS-Bench-1Shot1 on CIFAR-10 (a) between random vs. true labels, and (b) between randomvs. true data. Each pair (x, y) in the plots denotes the approximation for one candidate architecture inthe search space with true vs. random labels (or data), respectively. The trends of these approximationsare further illustrated by the lines in orange. In addition, Pearson correlation coefficient ρ of theapproximations with random vs. true labels (or data) is given in the corner.
Figure 2: Comparison of search efficiency (search budget in x-axis) and effectiveness (test errorevaluated on CIFAR-10 in y-axis) between NASI and other NAS algorithms in the three search spacesof NAS-Bench-1Shot1. The test error for each algorithm is reported with the mean and standard errorafter ten independent searches.
Figure 3: The relation between test error and approximated kΘ0(A)ktr of candidate architecturesin the three search spaces of NAS-Bench-1Shot1 over CIFAR-10. Note that x-axis denotes theapproximated kΘ0(A)ktr, which is averaged over the architectures grouped in the same bin based ontheir approximated kΘ0(A)ktr. Correspondingly, y-axis denotes the averaged test error with standarddeviation (scaled by 0.5) of these grouped architectures. In addition, the red lines demonstrate thesmallest test errors achieved by candidate architectures in these three search spaces.
Figure 4:	The optimization behavior (test error on CIFAR-10 in model training) of the final selectedarchitectures with different constraint V and penalty coefficient μ. The model parameter (MB) denotedby p of each architecture is given in the top-right corner.
Figure 5:	The final selected normal and reduction cells of NASI-FIX and NASI-ADA in the reducedDARTS search space on CIFAR-10. Note that x0 , x1 denote the input nodes, x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 denoteintermediate nodes and x6 denotes the output node as introduced in Appendix B.2.
Figure 6:	The impacts of constraint V and penalty coefficient μ on the generalization performance ofthe final selected architectures by NASI: (a) their joint impacts, and (b) their individual impacts.
