Figure 1: Overview of the CONTINUAL KNOWLEDGE LEARNING benchmark. INVARIANTLAMA is used tomeasure the time-invariant world knowledge gained from D0. UPDATEDLAMA is used to measure the updateof world knowledge from D0 →D1. NEWLAMA is used to measure new world knowledge gained from D1 .
Figure 2: Performance at each epoch during continued pretraining in the main experimental setting.
Figure 3: Performance at each epoch on INVARIANTLAMA during continued pretraining in MAIN, SMALL,and Small-P 1→SMALL-P2 scenarios. Each marker indicates the result at each continual pretraining epoch.
Figure 4: Dataset construction pipeline for (a) UPDATEDLAMA, NEWLAMA, and (b) NEWLAMA-EASYCC-RecentNews We first construct CC-RECENTNEWS, a novel text corpus containing rel-atively new knowledge as D1. We use news-please (Hamborg et al., 2017), similar to the CC-NEWS (Liu et al., 2019) and REALNEWS dataset (Zellers et al., 2019), to crawl 221,779 newsarticles published from May 2020 to April 2021. LMs initially pretrained on D0 constructed be-fore May 2020 can be continually pretrained on CC-RECENTNEWS to gain relatively recent worldknowledge.
Figure 5:	Mturk interface used for construction of UPDATEDLAMA and NEWLAMASupreme Court rejects petition from Louisiana pastor facing charges for violating ban on largegatherings(2020-11-27)：The U.S. Supreme Court rejected a petition Friday from a Louisiana pastor who sought emergency relief from criminalcharges he faced for holding services in violation of large-gathering restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic.The pastor,Tbny Spell, claimed in a Nov. 18 filing that Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards' restrictions violated his First Amendment rights.
Figure 6:	First mturk interface used for construction of NEWLAMA-EASYnave tne autnonty to remove(2020-05-13):∣ MinneSota ∣ ⅛Γ∣ John C. Calhoun ∣ can revert to its original ∣ Dakota ∣ title, ∣ Bde Maka Skaaccording toresult in future name cnaπges imposed Dy tne state wιtn no input from ιmpacteα local residents.Pnanging tne names ot allof our ∣ 10,OOO-PlUS ∣ lakes every time the political winds blow a certain direction undermines stability that residents andcommunities need," she said, according to ∣ the Star TribUne ∣. ∣ The MinneaPOliS City Park Board ∣ and ∣ HennePin CoUnty ∣spent ∣ two years ∣ gathering public input before they supported the change In 2018.Bde Maka Ska — pronouncedPlease make sure ALL of the requirements are met in #1. Or else HIT will get REJECTEDDakota ∣ for ∣ White Earth Lake ∣, reports said at the time, and the name had been useduntil ∣ the early 180OS ∣ when federal SUrVeyOrS renamed it. ∣ CalhoUirl served ∣ IWO ∣ terms as vice president, from 1825 to1832 under presidents ∣ JOhn QUinCy Adami~∣ and ∣ AndreWJaCkSOn ∣, respectively. Throughout his long political career, hedefender of slavery In new states and territories during the expansionist era∙He ∞ntinued to play an influential role innational politics until his death in ∣ 1850 ∣ after contracting tuberculosis.His support for slavery also led ∣ Yale UniVerSity ∣,which he once attended, to drop his name from ∣ One ∣ of its residential colleges in ∣ 2017 ∣.
Figure 7: Second mturk interface used for construction of NEWLAMA-EASY19Table 6: Examples of INVARIANTLAMA, UPDATEDLAMA, NEWLAMA, and NEWLAMA-EASYTask	Input	OutputINVARIANTLAMA	iPod Touch is produced by	 The Sharon Cuneta Show was created in	 The native language of Lee Chang-dong is		Apple Philippines KoreanUPDATEDLAMA		is the prime minister of England. 	has the most passing yards in the NFL. Bale has	champions league titles with Real Madrid.	Theresa May→ Boris Johnson Brady Quinn→ Jalen Guyton 314NEWLAMA	Alicia Braga plays	in the New Mutant. 	owns the rights to the Falcon and the Winter Soldier. Tesla invested	in the digital currency bitcoin.	Cecilia Reyes Disney 1.5 billionNEWLAMA-EASY	The decision of the two volleyball stars Bria and Cimone Woodard to withdraw from the Power 5 School to study at	has become a national story. Allen Lazard is officially listed as questionable with a nuclear injury after missing the last	games.	Howard University sixC Experimental ConfigurationPretraining Congifuration We utilize the T5 initially pretrained on C4 (April 2019) and contin-ually pretrained with salient span masking (Guu et al., 2020) on Wikipedia (May 2020) as initial-ization. We use the checkpoints from Wolf et al. (2020). We also perform the SSM objective duringCKL because it was shown to help LMs “focus on problems that require world knowledge” (Guuet al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020).
Figure 8:	Analyzing the cause of the EM gap between UPDATEDLAMA and NEWLAMA.
Figure 9:	Mean P@k curve for CKL benchmark with varying k.
