Figure 1: Comparisons among techniques. Most previous methods can be categorized into instanceadaptation [8], global adaptation [58], or local adaptation [43], which perform adaptation on thefeatures of the detector. In decoupled adaptation, the adaptors are decoupled from the detector, anddifferent adaptors are also decoupled. Decouple means that different parts have independent modelparameters, independent input data distributions and independent training losses. Different parts arecoordinated into some relationships through data rather than gradients, e.g., different adaptors forma cascading relationship while the detector and the adaptors form a self-feedback relationship.
Figure 2: Category adaptation (best viewed in color). (a) The IoU distribution of the proposals fromFoggy Cityscapes. When We increase the confidence threshold from 0 to 0.9, undefined proposals(proposals with IoU between 0.3 and 0.7) will decrease. (b) Proposals with lower confidence willbe assigned a lower weight in the adaptation. (c) The discriminator D is trained to separate thesource-domain proposals from the target-domain proposals for each class independently, while thefeature extractor Fcls is encouraged to fool D.
Figure 3: Bounding box adaptation (best viewed in color). Box adaptor has three parts: featuregenerator Freg, regressor Greg and adversarial regressor G黑.Gadv learns to maximize the targetdisparity by moving two predicted boxes far from each other while Freg learns to minimize the targetdisparity by making two predicted boxes overlap as much as possible.
Figure 4: Qualitative results on the target domain.
Figure 5: Error analysis.
Figure 6: T-SNE visualization of features. (a) and (b) are features from the category adaptor. (c) and(d) are features from the Faster RCNN. (Orange: VOC; Blue: Comic2k).
Figure 7: Qualitative results on VOC → Clipart.
Figure 8: Qualitative results on VOC → Comic.
Figure 9: Qualitative results on Sim10k → Cityscapes.
Figure 10: Qualitative results on Cityscapes → Foggy Cityscapes.
