Figure 1: Joint prediction provides consistent motion prediction. Illustration of differencesbetween marginal and joint motion prediction. Each color represents a distinct prediction. Left:Marginal prediction for bottom center vehicle. Scores indicate likelihood of trajectory. Note that theprediction is independent of other vehicle trajectories. Right: Joint prediction for three vehicles ofinterest. Scores indicate likelihood of entire scene consisting of trajectories of all three vehicles.
Figure 2: Single model architecture for multiple motion prediction tasks. Left: Different maskingstrategies define distinct tasks. The left column represents current time and the top row representsthe agent indicating the autonomous vehicle (AV). A single model can be trained for data associatedwith motion prediction, conditional motion prediction, and goal-directed prediction, by matchingthe masking strategy to each prediction task. Right: Attention-based encoder-decoder architecturefor joint scene modeling. Architecture employs factored attention along the time and agent axes toexploit the dependencies in the data, and cross-attention to inject side information.
Figure 3: Goal-conditioned prediction navigates AV to selected goal positions. Rectangles indi-cate vehicles on the road. Lines indicate the road graph (RG) colored by the type of lane marker.
Figure 4: Pseudo-code for heading loss component.
Figure 5: Quantitative comparison of the marginal and joint prediction models. Left: Themarginal minADE broken down as a function of number of predicted agents. When there are moreagents, producing internally consistent predictions is more challenging, and hence the joint modelperforms slightly worse. Right: Overlap rate between pairs of agent predictions. The joint modelproduces internally consistent predictions with lower inter-prediction overlap rates.
Figure 6: We show marginal minADE on a per scene basis broken down by different scene levelstatistics. Interestingly, we show that both the marginal and joint models become out of distributionabove 20 m/s, where there is minimal training data.
Figure 7: Analysis of the multi-task model for goal-conditioned motion prediction. Left: Cumu-lative probability of the AV minADE in goal conditioned prediction (blue) and motion prediction(black) masking strategies. Right: AV minADE for goal conditioned prediction (blue) and motionprediction (black) as a function of AV speed (averaged over the ground truth trajectory).
Figure 8: Pseudo-code in TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) demonstrating the joint versus marginalloss formulation.
