Figure 1: (left) Multiple traffic data with similar pattern, (right) extracted representative patterndifferent roads and a representative traffic pattern (right time series). With the representative pat-terns, we transform the conventional forecasting problem into a pattern-matching task to find outwhich pattern would be the best match for the given spatio-temporal features to predict future trafficconditions. With insights from the huge success of neural memory networks in natural languageprocessing and machine translation (Weston et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Kaiser et al., 2017;Madotto et al., 2018), we design graph convolutional memory networks called GCMem to man-age representative patterns in spatio-temporal perspective. Lastly, we design PM-MemNet, whichutilizes representative patterns from GCMem for traffic forecasting. PM-MemNet consists of an en-coder and a decoder. The encoder consists of temporal embedding with stacked GCMem, whichgenerates meaningful representations via memorization, and the decoder is composed of a gatedrecurrent unit (GRU) with GCMem. We compare PM-MemNet to existing state-of-the-art modelsand find that PM-MemNet outperforms existing models. We also present a qualitative analysis inwhich we further investigate the strengths of PM-MemNet in managing a traffic pattern where highresponsiveness of a model to abrupt speed changes is desired for accurate forecasting.
Figure 2: (a) Example daily patterns. Each part between the red dash lines is the speed patternssliced by a given time window, (b) cosine similarity distribution of the original pattern set with classimbalance, and (c) the clustered pattern set.
Figure 3: (a) Overall architecture of PM-MemNet where L = 3. Dashed line means adjacent weighttying. (b) GCMem architecture with GCNs (gray blocks) and (c) representative memory selectionamong k-nearest patterns for Xi with k=3, dj = d(pj , Xi).
Figure 4: Effect of |P| in NAVER-Seoul(left) and METR-LA (right).
Figure 5: Performance result plots with error bars with NAVER-Seoul (left) and METR-LA (right)datasets.
Figure 6: NAVER-Seoul speed prediction visualization for (upper) 90-minute forecasting and(lower) 60-minute forecasting. Red circles show the interval with abrupt speed changing, whichare successfully detected by PM-MemNet.
Figure 7: Sample input (ground truth, blue) and matched representative pattern for prediction (or-ange). the red line means the current time step t.
