Figure 1: Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a ResNet18 on both MNIST andCIFAR10 datasets. The x-axis in the figures are set to have log(log(t)) scales and the y-axis in the figures areset to have log scales.
Figure 2:	Training dynamics in ULPM. The x-axis in the figures is set to have log(log(t)) scales,and the y-axis in the figures are set to have log scales. (a) The dynamics of the variation of thecentered class-mean features’ norms (shown in blue) and the variation of the classifier’s norms(shown in red). We observe that the logarithm of both terms decreases at a rate O(1/(log(t))). (b)Dynamics of within-class variation of the last layer features. The logarithm of the variation convergesat approximately the rate O(1/ log(t))). (c) The dynamics of the cosines between pairs of last layerfeatures (shown in blue) and those of the classifiers (shown in red). The logarithm of both termsconverge approximately at rate O(1/ log(t))). (d) Dynamics of the distance between the normalizedcentered classifier and normalized last layer feature. The logarithm of the quantity converges atapproximately the rate O(1/ log(t))) to the point of self-duality.
Figure 3:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a VGG13 on CIFAR10 dataset. Thex-axis in the figures are set to have log(log(t)) scales and the y-axis in the figures are set to have log scales.
Figure 4:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a VGG13 on the MNIST dataset. Thex-axis in the figures are set to have log(log(t)) scales and the y-axis in the figures are set to have log scales.
Figure 5:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a VGG18 on the KMNIST dataset.
Figure 6:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a ResNet18 on the KMNIST dataset.
Figure 7:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a VGG13 on the Fashion-MNISTdataset. The x-axis in the figures are set to have log(log(t)) scales and the y-axis in the figures are set to havelog scales.
Figure 8:	Experiments on real datasets without weight decay. We trained a ResNet18 on the Fashion-MNISTdataset. The x-axis in the figures are set to have log(log(t)) scales and the y-axis in the figures are set to havelog scales.
