Figure 1: Comparisons between the effective units and ineffective units. For effective units, sincethe spatial pattern of the features in the images would be preserved, units should stably presentthis regularized spatial pattern. We propose a topological-based quantity called feature entropy toindicate the unit status, giving reliable indication in various situations like rescaling the values.
Figure 2: Example of the conversion from a unit to its clique complex.
Figure 3: Instance of complex filtration (A) and Betti curve (B).
Figure 4: Calculation flow of feature entropy.
Figure 5: (A) Comparisons of feature entropy (1) and selective rate (2) of different layers betweenthe convergence model and random-initialized model, where (3) shows the results over 100 classes.
Figure 6: Comparisons between models in separately model set A (A) and model set B (B). Com-pare the feature entropy (1) and selective rate (2) of units at different layers between models in thecorresponding model set on the exampled class. (3) shows the scatter plot between feature entropyand selective rate of units at the last convolutional layer on the 100 sampled classes.
Figure 7:	Histogram of the feature entropy in 100 trials for different sample size.
Figure 8:	(1-3) Histogram of the feature entropy of units in the layer "block5_conv3" and"block5_conv2" for different sample size.(4) Feature entropy averaged across all the units in thelayer with respect to the sample size. Error bars stand for performing the sampling 100 times.
Figure 9:	(A) Comparisons of feature entropy of different layers between the convergence modeland random-initialized model. (B) Comparisons of feature entropy of the layers in separately threeresidual blocks between the convergence model and random-initialized model.
Figure 10:	(B) Simultaneous evolution of training loss and feature entropy during training for thechosen class (A-B) and for the 100 classes (C-D).
Figure 11: Comparisons between models in model set R. Compare the feature entropy (1) andselective rate (2) of units at different layers between models in the corresponding model set on theexampled class. (3) shows the scatter plot between feature entropy and selective rate of units at thelast residual block on the 100 sampled classes.
Figure 12: Cumulative ablation curves of accuracy (1) and loss (2) according to the descendingrank (A) and the ascending rank (B), together with comparisons with other methods (3-4).
Figure 13: (A) Accuracy of the fine-tuned models with respect to the number chosen classes usedfor feature entropy calculation. (B) Accuracy of the fine-tuned models on different pruning ratios.
