Figure 1: In this work We are interested in enabling autonomous robots to solve complex long-horizon tasks that wereunseen during training. To do so, We assume access to a large multi-task dataset of demonstrations, extract skills from theoffline dataset, and adapt those skills to new tasks that were unseen during training.
Figure 2:OUr algorithm - Few-Shot Imitation Learning with Skill Transition Models (FIST) - is composed of three parts:(a) Skill Extraction: we fit a skill encoder, decoder, inverse skill dynamics model, and a distance function to the offlinedataset; (b) Skill Adaptation: For downstream task, we are given a few demonstrations and adapt the skills learned in (a),by fine-tuning the encoder, decoder, and the inverse model. (c) Few-Shot Imitation: finally, to imitate the downstreamdemonstrations, we utilize the distance function to perform a look ahead along the demonstration to condition the inversemodel and decode an action.
Figure 3: Top: In each environment, We block some part of the environment and collect task-agnostic and reward-freetrajectories for extracting skills. In the kitchen environment, red markers indicate the objects that are excluded. Bottom:For downstream demonstrations, we use 10 expert trajectories that involve unseen parts of the maze or manipulation ofunseen objects.
Figure 4: Normalized Reward on all of our environments, and their excluded regions / objects. For maze, the episodelength is subtracted from the maximum episode length, which is then divided by the maximum episode length. Forkitchen, the reward is the number of sub-tasks completed in order, and normalized by the maximum of 4.0(ii)	In the AntMaze environment, FIST achieves the best performance compared to the baselines. SPiRL andBC+FT make no progress in navigating the agent towards the goal while FIST is able to frequently reach thegoals in the demonstrated trajectories. We believe that the low success rate numbers in this experiment is dueto the low quality of trajectories that exist in the offline skill dataset D. In the dataset, we see many episodeswith ant falling over, and FIST’s failure cases also demonstrate the same behavior, hence resulting in a lowsuccess rate. We hypothesize that with a better dataset FIST can achieve a higher success rate number.
