Figure 1: An energy based treatment of coop-erative games leads to a series of new playervaluations: K-step variational values, satis-fying basic valuation axioms: null player,marginalism & symmetry.
Figure 2: Data removal results. Numbers in the legend are the decoupling errors. Columns: 1st:synthetic data; 2nd: breast cancer data with 569 samples; 3rd: digits data with 1797 samples. Specificconfigurations (e.g., temperature) are put inside the figure texts.
Figure 3: First column: Change of predicted probabilities when removing features. The decouplingerror is included in the legend. Last three columns: waterfall plots of feature importance.
Figure 4: Statistics on valuations with the xgboost classifier. First row: box plot of valuations. Wealways consider the predicted probability of the ground truth label. “True” means the samples withpositive ground truth label and “False” means with the negative ground truth label. Second row:Average ranking of the 12 features. Colored texts denote different rankings among the three criteria.
Figure 5: Comparison of different importance measures for FLID games. Hidden dimensions: Firstcolumn D=4, second column D=8. n denotes # of players. Vertical lines means (marginals - 0.5)since we would like to clearly show positive players (marginal > 0.5) and negative players (marginal< 0.5).
Figure 6: First column: Change of predicted probabilities when removing features. The decouplingerror is included in the legend. Last three columns: waterfall plots of feature importance fromVariational Index, Shapley and Banzhaf.
Figure 7: Not very distinguishable results. First column: Change of predicted probabilities whenremoving features. The decoupling error is included in the legend. Last three columns: waterfallplots of feature importance from Variational Index, Shapley and Banzhaf.
Figure 8:	Full statistics on valuations with the xgboost classifier (in the main text the last row isskipped due to space limit). First row: box plot of valuations returned by the three criteria. We alwaysconsider the predicted probability of the ground truth label. “True” means the samples with positiveground truth label and “False” means with the negative ground truth label. Second and third rows:Average ranking of the 12 features. Colored texts denote different rankings among the three criteria.
Figure 9:	Statistics on valuations with the MLP classifier. First row: box plot of valuations returnedby the three criteria. We always consider the predicted probability of the ground truth label. “True”means the samples with positive ground truth label and “False” means with the negative ground truthlabel. Second and third rows: Average ranking of the 12 features. Colored texts denote differentrankings among the three criteria.
Figure 10: Statistics on valuations with the logistic regression classifier. First row: box plot ofvaluations returned by the three criteria. We always consider the predicted probability of the groundtruth label. “True” means the samples with positive ground truth label and “False” means with thenegative ground truth label. Second and Third rows: Average ranking of the 12 features. Coloredtexts denote different rankings among the three criteria.
Figure 11: Stepwise difference with difference number of samples m when estimating the gradient ofmultilinear extension using MCMC sampling. The three curves: m = n, m = 5n, m = 10n.
