Figure 1: Overview of the pre-training stage in GraphMVP. The black dashed circles denote subgraphmasking, and we mask the same region in the 2D and 3D graphs. Multiple views of the molecules(herein: Halicin) are mapped to the representation space via 2D and 3D GNN models, where weconduct GraphMVP for SSL pre-training, using both contrastive and generative pretext tasks.
Figure 2: We select the molecules whose properties can be easily resolved via 3D but not 2D. Therandomly initialised 2D GNN achieves accuracy of 38.9 ± 0.8 and 77.9 ± 1.1, respectively. TheGraphMVP pre-trained ones obtain scores of 42.3 ± 1.3 and 81.5 ± 0.4, outperforming all theprecedents in Section 4.2. We plot cases where random initialization fails but GraphMVP is correct.
Figure 3: Venn diagram of mutual information. Inspired by wikipedia.
Figure 4: Contrastive SSL in GraphMVP. The black dashed circles represent subgraph masking.
Figure 5: VRR SSL in GraPhMVP The black dashed circles represent subgraph masking.
Figure 6: Statistics on the conformers of each moleculeIn Figure 6, We plot the histogram of the summation of top (descending sorted by weights) {1,5,10,20}conformer weights. The physical meaning of the weight is the portion of each conformer occurredin nature. We observe that the top 5 or 10 conformers are sufficient as they have dominated nearlyall the natural observations. Such long-tailed distribution is also in alignment with our findings inthe ablation studies. We find that utilizing top five conformers in the GraphMVP has reached anidealised spot between effectiveness and efficiency.
Figure 7: Sum of occurrence weights for the top major conformersF.2 DOWNSTREAM DATASET OVERVIEWIn this section, we review the four main categories of datasets used for downstream tasks.
Figure 8: Molecules selection, we select the molecules that lies in the black dash box.
Figure 9: Molecule examples where GraphMVP successfully recognizes the 3D diameters whilerandom initialisation fails, legends are in a format of “molecule id”-“2d diameter”-“3d diameter”.
