Figure 1: Transfer of information from a surrogate to a target in GFCS: Gradient First, CoimageSecond. A sequence of optimisation steps is taken through the loss landscape of the target model, asshown on the right. Each candidate direction q is supplied by the surrogate in one of two ways: eitherthrough direct transfer of the surrogate’s own gradient qsur, or as a qco generated through a process ofcoimage sampling described in Sec. 2.2. qtrue is the target’s true but inaccessible gradient. As shownin Sec. 3.2, the method relies mostly on the directly transferred qsurs, using the qcos to avoid failure.
Figure 2:	CDFs representing the number of successfully attacked examples at different query countswhen performing untargeted black-box attacks on VGG-16, ResNet-50, and Inception-v3 networks.
Figure 3:	Breakdown of the total query count for the proposed method, GFCS: Gradient First,Coimage Second. The x-axis represents the number of queries for a successful attack required by thegradient part of the method, and the y-axis the number required by the coimage part. Histograms onthe top and right sides of the scatter plots represent marginal empirical distributions.
Figure 4:	Comparison between GFCS, which evaluates surrogate gradients locally, vs. flavours ofSimBA which build location-agnostic gradient priors. Please refer to Sec. 3.3.
Figure 5: CDFs showing the number of successfully attacked examples at different query countswhen performing targeted black-box attacks on 1000 ImageNet images, with four surrogates.
Figure 6: Breakdown of the total query count for the proposed method, GFCS: Gradient First,Coimage Second. The x-axis represents the number of queries required for a successful attack by thegradient part of the method, while the y-axis represents the number required by the coimage part.
Figure 7: The figure illustrates two sets of curves. The solid curves represent the median querycount required to successfully attack the three architectures as a function of the step length, while thedashed curves show the success rate.
Figure 8: CDFs representing the number of successfully attacked examples at different querycounts when performing untargeted black-box attacks on VGG-16 and ResNet-50, with one or foursurrogates, under `2 norm bound ν = 5.0.
Figure 9: CDFs representing the number of successfully attacked examples (from CIFAR-10) atdifferent query counts when performing untargeted black-box attacks on a ResNet-110 network usinga ResNet-20 surrogate.
Figure 11: Breakdown of the total query count for GFCS, as in Figs. 3 and 6, for the targeted attackexperiments whose results are depicted in Fig. 5. See the caption of Fig. 3 if a reminder of what thefigure depicts is required.
