Table 1: Accuracies of representative models trained on CIFAR10 with '∞-norm constrained at-tacks. Robust accuracies are calculated under combined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. AvgAccaverages over clean and all robust accuracies; AvgRobAcc averages over all robust accuracies.
Table 2: CW-'2 attack results on models trained on MNIST with '2-norm constrained attacks.
Table 3: CW-'2 attack results on models trained on CIFAR10 with '2-norm constrained attacks.
Table 4: Accuracies of models trained on MNIST with '∞-norm constrained attacks. These ro-bust accuracies are calculated under both combined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1indicate 2 different random seeds.
Table 5: Accuracies of models trained on CIFAR10 with '∞-norm constrained attacks. These ro-bust accuracies are calculated under both combined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1indicate 2 different random seeds.
Table 6: Accuracies of models trained on MNIST with '2-norm constrained attacks. These robustaccuracies are calculated under both combined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indi-cate 2 different random seeds.
Table 7: Accuracies of models trained on CIFAR10 with '2-norm constrained attacks. These ro-bust accuracies are calculated under both combined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1indicate 2 different random seeds.
Table 8: Accuracies of models trained on MNIST with '∞-norm constrained attacks. These robustaccuracies are calculated under only whitebox PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different randomseeds.
Table 9: Accuracies of models trained on CIFAR10 with '∞-norm constrained attacks. These robustaccuracies are calculated under only whitebox PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different randomseeds.
Table 10: Accuracies of models trained on MNIST with '2-norm constrained attacks. These robustaccuracies are calculated under only whitebox PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different randomseeds.
Table 11: Accuracies of models trained on CIFAR10 with '2-norm constrained attacks. These robustaccuracies are calculated under only whitebox PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different randomseeds.
Table 12: The TransferGaP of models trained on MNIST with '∞-norm constrained attacks. Trans-ferGap indicates the gap between robust accuracy under only whitebox PGD attacks and undercombined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different random seeds.
Table 13: The TransferGap of models trained on CIFAR10 with '∞-norm constrained attacks.
Table 14: The TransferGaP of models trained on MNIST with '2-norm constrained attacks. Trans-ferGap indicates the gap between robust accuracy under only whitebox PGD attacks and undercombined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different random seeds.
Table 15: The TransferGap of models trained on CIFAR10 with '2-norm constrained attacks. Trans-ferGaP indicates the gaP between robust accuracy under only whitebox PGD attacks and undercombined (whitebox+transfer) PGD attacks. sd0 and sd1 indicate 2 different random seeds.
