Table 1: Categories of interventions on images. Distortion interventions change pixels withoutchanging game state or semantic concepts. Pixel perturbations in adversarial ML add adversarialnoise to images to change the output of the network without making human-perceptible changesin the image. Semantics-preserving interventions are manipulations of game state that result inan image that preserves some semantic concept of interest. Reflections across lines of symmetrytypically alter aspects of game state, but do not meaningfully change any semantic informationabout the scene. “Fat-hand” interventions are manipulations intended to measure the effect of somespecific treatment, but which unintentionally alter other relevant aspects of the system. The term isdrawn from the literature on causal modeling (Scheines, 2005).
Table 2: Summary of the survey on usage of saliency mapsin deep RL. Columns represent categories of saliency mapusage, and rows represent categories of saliency map meth-ods, with each cell denoting the number of claims in thosecategories. Individual claims may be counted in multiplecolumns.
Table 3: Numeric results from regression analysis for the observational and interventional results inFigures 5b and c. The results indicate a very small strength of effect (slope) for both observationaland interventional data and a small correlation coefficient (r), suggesting that there is, at best, onlya very weak causal dependence of saliency on distance-to-player.
Table 4: Hyperparameters used in training the A2C model.
Table 6: Numeric results representing Pearson’s correlation coefficient and p-value for the differ-ences in reward and saliency (object, perturbation and Jacobian) from the original trajectory foreach intervention. Results show small correlation coefficients (r) suggesting that there is a weakrelationship between the differences in reward and saliency for the interventions.
Table 7: Numeric results from regression analysis for the observational and interventional results inFigures 10b and c. The results indicate a very small strength of effect (slope) for both observationaland interventional data and a small correlation coefficient (r), suggesting that there is, at best, onlya very weak causal dependence of saliency on distance-to-player.
Table 8: Numeric results from regression analysis for the observational and interventional results inFigures 11b and c. The results indicate a very small strength of effect (slope) for both observationaland interventional data and a small correlation coefficient (r), suggesting that there is, at best, onlya very weak causal dependence of saliency on distance-to-player.
