Table 1: Transferability of non-targeted adversarial images generated between pairs of models. Thefirst column indicates the average RMSD of all adversarial images generated for the model in thecorresponding row. The cell (i, j) indicates the accuracy of the adversarial images generated formodel i (row) evaluated over model j (column). Results of top-5 accuracy can be found in ouronline technical report: Liu et al. (2016).
Table 2: The matching rate of targeted adversarial images generated using the optimization-basedapproach. The first column indicates the average RMSD of the generated adversarial images. Cell(i, j ) indicates that matching rate of the targeted adversarial images generated for model i (row)when evaluated on model j (column). The top-5 results can be found in our online technical re-port: Liu et al. (2016).
Table 3: The matching rate of targeted adversarial images generated using the optimization-basedapproach. The first column indicates the average RMSD of the generated adversarial images. Cell(i, j ) indicates that percentage of the targeted adversarial images generated for the ensemble of thefour models except model i (row) is predicted as the target label by model j (column). In each row,the minus sign “-” indicates that the model of the row is not used when generating the attacks.
Table 4: Accuracy of non-targeted adversarial images generated using the optimization-based ap-proach. The first column indicates the average RMSD of the generated adversarial images. Cell(i, j ) corresponds to the accuracy of the attack generated using four models except model i (row)when evaluated over model j (column). In each row, the minus sign “-” indicates that the modelof the row is not used when generating the attacks. Results of top-5 accuracy can be found in ouronline technical report: Liu et al. (2016).
Table 5: The number of all possible predicted labels for each model in the same plane described in Figure 3.
Table 6: Original images and adversarial images evaluated over Clarifai.com. For labels returnedfrom Clarifai.com, we sort the labels firstly by rareness: how many times a label appears in theClarifai.com results for all adversarial images and original images, and secondly by confidence.
