Table 1: Performance of K-Adapter, ERNIE, and their dropped versions onentity typing on the OpenEntity and FIGER datasets.
Table 2: Performance change of K-Adapter and ERNIE onthe OpenEntity dataset with different test sets.
Table 3: Analysis of KI interpretation results for K-Adapter and ERNIE in terms of different types of relations(topology feature). The percentages of integrated triples/entities, as well as of CR and CF entities for each typeof relations are presented.
Table 4: The interpretation of KI for K-Adapter in terms of relations.
Table 5: Notations and their descriptionsNotation	DescriptionG	The knowledge graph for KIV	The set of entities/nodes of KGE	The set of relations/edges of KGvi	The entity/node indexed as i in the KGti	The entity text attached on ViLM(∙)	The language model, where the input is entity text, and the output is its representationNvi	The set of neighbors (entities/nodes) connected to ViG(vi)	The local graph structure in terms of Vix	The random variable of the entity representationxi	The entity representations of Vig	The random variable of the local graph structureMI(∙; ∙)	The mutual information between two random variablesA	The adjacency matrix of KG|V|	The number of entities/nodes in KGR	The set of real numbersI	The identity matrixD	The degree matrix of KGLn	The normalized Laplacian matrix
Table 6: Statistics of T-REx-rc and WikidataStatistics DataSetSf	# of entities	# of triples	# of aligned sentences	# of entities (optimization)	# of triples (optimization)T-REx-rc	-781,275-	1,282,504	5,565,478	-	-Wikidata	3,275,534	12,849,311	-	1,344,393	3,240,272The datasets that K-Adapter and ERNIE use are T-REx-rc and Wikidata, some statistics of them aregiven in Table 6.
Table 7: Drop statistics for the Integration Experiment.
Table 8: The number of aligned sentences for relations.
Table 9: The interpretation of KI, CR, and CF for K-Adapter in terms of relations and entities. We list 3 typicalrelations: CR happens to most connected entities; CF happens to most connected entities; and KI, CR, CFhappens equally to connected entities. And we list 5 correspondingly aligned sentences. The Google Ngram ofentities are reported to show the popularity of entities.
