Table 1: The average performance of various forecasting methods across all datasets with respect torelative latency (compared to Seasonal Naive) and nCRPS. The table shows classical methods (top),deep learning methods (middle, left), hyper-ensembles using all hyperparameter configurations ofdeep learning models (middle, right), and latency-constrained ensembles (bottom). Best valuesacross within each group are displayed in bold, best values across all models are starred.
Table 2: Overview of all models considered and their associated hyperparameters. The upper seven models do not require training. The lower six models are deep learning models. For all deep learning			models, three context lengths are considered as well	as three hyperparameter configurations (except		for MQ-RNN) that result in small, medium and large models, respectively. Hyperparameters that are			not augmented keep their default values. The hyperparameters of the		“default” models correspond	to the medium size.				Context Lengths	Hyperparameters	ARIMA (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018)	—	—	ETS (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018)	—	—	NPTS (Rangapuram et al., 2021)	—	—	Prophet (Taylor & Letham, 2018)	—	—	Seasonal Naive (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018)	—	—	STL-AR (Talagala, 2021)	—	—	Theta (Assimakopoulos & Nikolopoulos, 2000)	—	—			# Layers	# CellsDeepAR (Salinas et al., 2020a)	1,2,4	1	20		2	40		4	80		# Filters	Kernel SizesMQ-CNN (Wen et al., 2017)	2, 4, 8	20	3, 3, 2		30	7, 3, 3
Table 3: Statistics of the benchmark datasets. Frequencies read as follows: MIN - minutely, H -hourly, D - daily, B - business daily, W - weekly, M - monthly, Q - quarterly, Y - yearly. Numberof observations are calculated from the training data.
Table 4: Comparison of different surrogate models with respect to their ability to rank model config-urations according to their nCRPS. Ranking metrics are averaged across all benchmark datasets andmultiplied by 100. Metrics for non-deterministic surrogates (random and MLP) are further averagedby running the entire evaluation over five random seeds. Best values for each metric are displayedin bold.
