Table 1: Comparison of results on Kinship and UMLS. The results from NeuralLP, DRUM, and ourcode use the random break metric. *We modified the RNNLogic code to compute the MRR valuesbased on the random break metric and the values obtained were the same as the values of the originalMRR computation UP to three decimal places. f ConVE results are from the original paper.
Table 2: Comparison of results on FB15k-237 and WN18RR. *The RNNLogic MRR value forWN18RR is obtained via random break ranking. ] We could not run RNNLogic on FB15k-237, andreport numbers from the original paper. f The results for ConvE and RotatE were taken from Qu et al.
Table 3: Comparison of results on YAGO3-10 and DB111K-174 using random break metric. f Theresults for ConVE are taken from DettmerS et al. (2018). ∣ The results for RotatE are from SUn et al.
Table 4: MRR and aVerage number of rules selected per relation5	ConclusionExisting methods to obtain logic rules for knowledge graph completion can be fairly time consuming.
Table 5: Sizes of datasets.
Table 6: Wall clock run times in minutes when running in parallel on a 60 core machine for the topgroup of results and a machine with 16 CPUs and 1 GPU for the bottom results.
Table 7: Results on WN18RR obtained with different ways of dealing with equal scores.
Table 8: Comparison with results on Kinship and UMLS taken from the MINERVA paper. Queriesare constructed from test set facts by right entity removal. Our code uses random break ranking. fNTP uses optimistic ranking.
Table 9: Comparison with results on FB15k-237 and WN18RR taken from the MINERVA paper. Ourcode uses random break ranking. f The M-Walk results are taken from the associated paper.
Table 10: Rules generated by LPRules for two relations in YAGO3-10. The MRR values for aparticular rule were calculated using only the rules in the same line or above.
Table 11: Values of the parameter τ for each dataset.
Table 12: MRR obtained with fixed values of τ .
Table 13: Results on WN18RR with maximum rule length=4,5,6 obtained using random breakranking.
Table 14: MRR and average number of rules selected (S) for Kinship.
