Table 1: Mean values of ROC AUC and PR AUC metrics for the 919 outputs defined for theDeepSEA dataset and Macro-averaged recall (in %) and F1 for Virus under linear evaluation.
Table 2: Performance of the self-supervision techniques under semi-supervised learning protocolusing 1% and 10% of the labels in DeepSEA and Virus datasets. Supervised training performancewithout any pretraining is also reported as a baseline. Reported metrics are in line with Table 1.
Table 3: The achieved performance terms of Macro-averaged recall (in %) and F1 score undertransfer learning evaluation on virus dataset (Column 2-5) and T6SS (Column 6-9). We evaluatedthe results when base networks are fine-tuned and fixed. Here, the base network is trained in self-supervised way on the big bacteria dataset. Supervised training performance without any pretrainingis also reported as a baseline.
Table 4: The achieved performance in terms of F1 score for virus dataset under linear evaluationsetting with fixed pre-trained weights.
Table 5: Comparison of the methods in performance when they are pretrained using the wholedataset in self-supervised manner, followed by supervised training on 0.1% of the dataset. Super-vised baseline is not pretrained.
Table 6: Mean values of ROC AUC and PR AUC metrics for the 919 outputs defined for theDeepSEA dataset under linear evaluation protocol.
Table 7: Performance of the self-supervision techniques under semi-supervised learning protocolusing 1% and 10% of the labels in DeepSEA dataset. Supervised baseline without any pretraining isalso reported as a baseline. Reported metrics are in line with Table 1.
Table 8: Comparison of the methods in performance when they are pretrained using the wholedataset in self-supervised manner, followed by supervised training on 0.1% of the dataset. Super-vised baseline is not pretrained.
Table 9: Comparison of the methods in performance when they are pretrained using the wholedataset in self-supervised manner, followed by supervised training on 0.1% of the dataset. Super-vised baseline is not pretrained.
