Table 1: Theoretical lower-thresholds for σι/σ0 for different data dimensions and class A Probabil-ities. The ImageNet spatial size is assumed to be 3x256x256.
Table 2: Clean accuracies for both input-dependent and constant σ evaluation strategies on CIFAR10(C) and MNIST (M).
Table 3: Class-wise accuracy standard deviations for both input-dependent and constant σ evaluationstrategies on CIFAR10 (C) and MNIST (M).
Table 4: Accuracies, rates of abstentions and misclassification rates of Cohen et al. (2019) evaluationfor different levels of σ .
Table 5: Clean accuracies of different evaluations of our toy experiment.
Table 6: Clean accuracies for Cohen’s models and our non-constant σ(x) models.
Table 7: Standard deviations of class-wise accuracies for different levels of σ and r .
Table 8: Clean accuracies for Cohen’s models and our non-constant σ(x) models on MNIST.
Table 9: Standard deviations of class-wise accuracies for different levels of σ and r . The printedvalues are multiples of 100 of the real standard deviations.
Table 10: Standard deviations of class-wise accuracies for different levels of σ and trr, under con-stant rate r = 0.01.
Table 11: Standard deviations of clean accuracies, abstention rates and misclassification rates for 9runs of each parameter configuration on CIFAR10.
Table 12: Standard deviations of clean accuracies, abstention rates and misclassification rates for 8runs of each parameter configuration on MNIST.
Table 13: Clean accuracies for both input-dependent and constant σ evaluation strategies on CI-FAR10.
Table 14: Class-wise accuracy standard deviations for both input-dependent and constant σ evalua-tion strategies on CIFAR10.
Table 15: Clean accuracies for both input-dependent and constant σ evaluation strategies on MNIST.
Table 16: Class-wise accuracy standard deviations for both input-dependent and constant σ evalua-tion strategies on MNIST. Printed are multiples of 100 of the real values.
Table 17: Clean accuracies for both input-dependent and constant σ training strategies on CIFAR10.
Table 18: Class-wise accuracy standard deviations for both input-dependent and constant σ trainingstrategies on CIFAR10.
Table 19: Clean accuracies for both input-dependent and constant σ training strategies on MNIST.
Table 20: Class-wise accuracy standard deviations for both input-dependent and constant σ trainingstrategies on MNIST.
