Table 1: Comparison of MSE and according standard deviation scores across ten repetitions betweendifferent deep learning (above dashed line) and physics-aware neural network (below dashed line)methods on the different equations. Best results are reported in bold.
Table 2: Closed loop MSE on the train data from ten different training runs for each model for theBurger’s equation.
Table 3: Closed loop MSE on in-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model for theBurger’s equation.
Table 4: Closed loop MSE on out-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model forthe Burger’s equation.
Table 5: Closed loop MSE on the train data from ten different training runs for each model for thediffusion-sorption equation.
Table 6: Closed loop MSE on in-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model for thediffusion-sorption equation.
Table 7: Closed loop MSE on out-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model forthe diffusion-sorption equation.
Table 8: Closed loop MSE on train data from ten different training runs for each model for thediffusion-reaction equation.
Table 9: Closed loop MSE on in-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model for thediffusion-reaction equation.
Table 10: Closed loop MSE on out-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model forthe diffusion-reaction equation.
Table 11: Closed loop MSE on the train data from ten different training runs for each model for theAllen-Cahn equation.
Table 12: Closed loop MSE on in-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model forthe Allen-Cahn equation.
Table 13: Closed loop MSE on out-dis-test data from ten different training runs for each model forthe Allen-Cahn equation.
Table 14: MSE of PINN trained using data withfiner resolution from ten different training runsfor the diffusion-reaction equation.
Table 15: MSE of PhyDNet using the originalnetwork size from ten different training runs forthe diffusion-reaction equation.
Table 16: Soil and experimental parameters of core samples #1, #2, and #2B. D is the diffusioncoefficient, φ is the porosity, ρs is the bulk density, L and r are the length and radius of the sample,tend is the simulation time, Q is the flow rate in the bottom reservoir and us is the total concentrationof trichloroethylene in the sample.
Table 17: Comparison of runtime (in seconds) of single forward passes between different deeplearning (above dashed line) and physics-aware neural network (below dashed line) methods on thedifferent equations.
