Table 1: Test vπ and amount of overfitting of the learned policy. Test vπ is computed from 1000rollouts in the simulator. VSNTIS on the validation set - test vπ represents the amount of overfitting.
Table 2: MIMIC III sepsis dataset. Test evaluation, (0.05, 0.95) BCa bootstrap interval, and effectivesample size. The value of POELA without a CRM variance penalty is shown in parentheses.
Table 3: Hyperparameters in the TGI simulator experimentThe difference in the max update steps and checkpoints frequency is caused by the fact that BCQ andPQL is updated by stochastic gradient descent and all policy optimization based on SNTIS is usinggradient descent.
Table 4: Hyperparameters in the MIMIC III sepsis experimentC.2.2 Additional ablation study: without effective sample size constraints forhyper-parameter selection on validation setIn the main text, we set an effective sample size threshold of 200 for a policy/hyper-parameter to beselected on validation set. This is to make sure we have large enough effective sample size on the testset to provide reliable off-policy test estimates. Here we show the result if we do not threshold theeffective sample size on validation set. Generally, all algorithms will prefer a high off-policy estimateswithout enough effective sample size. On the test set, all algorithms yields a small effective samplesize, thus unreliable off-policy estimates and large bootstrap confidence interval. The proposedmethods is better than baselines but also has much smaller 95% bootstrap lower bound than with theeffective sample size constraint.
Table 5: Test evaluation without effective sample size constraint on the validation set, (0.05, 0.95)BCa bootstrap interval, and effective sample size in the sepsis cohort of MIMIC III dataset. Valueinside parenthesis of POELA is without CRM variance penalty.
Table 6: Importance weights overfitting: sum of SNTIS weights of learned policy on the training set.
Table 7: Importance weights overfitting: sum of SNTIS weights of learned policy on the training set.
Table 8: The effect of eligible action constraints δ on the results in MIMIC III sepsis dataset.
