Table 1: Methods that will be considered in the paper. Bakker et al. (2020) considered fixed vs. adaptiveand greedy vs. non-greedy, Pineda et al. (2020) considered data specific vs. subject specific policies and alsocompared against greedy methods. VDS stands for Variable-Density Sampling (Lustig et al., 2007) a commonheuristic which is not learning-based.
Table 2: SSIM at 25% on the test set, on knee data comparing two models in the long horizon setting of Bakkeret al. (2020), for the cvb (cropped, vertical, Bakker-type of masks) and c+rhz (cropped+resized, horizontal,Zhang-like masks) settings. This is an alternate aggregation as the one done on Table 3.
Table 3: AUC on the test set using SSIM, on knee data comparing two models in the long horizon settingof Bakker et al. (2020), for the cvb (cropped, vertical, Bakker-type of masks) and c+rhz (cropped+resized,horizontal, Zhang-like masks) settings. This is an alternate aggregation as the one done on Table 2.
Table 4: AUC on the test set when calculated against sampling rate and acceleration factor (1/sampling rate),as well as performance at the final sampling rate (100 lines acquired out of 332) on the knee dataset, using theprocessing of Pineda et al. (2020).
Table 5: AUC on the test set, using SSIM, on various data processing on Bakker’s knee setting. The ablation iscarried out over The mismatched setting refers to the evaluation of the model trained in the setting of Bakkeret al. (2020), but evaluated complex data preprocessing instead of magnitude data preprocessing. This makes thereconstruction and policy models to be out of the distribution. A model trained on the complex preprocessing isreported in the complex preprocessing (matched - ours) column.
Table 6: AUC on the test set, using SSIM, for the full ablation study using the model of Bakker et al. (2020). Theshort and long horizon results are not comparable with each other, as AUCs are integrated on the whole rangeof sampling rates. The top right part of the table (long horizon) replicated the results of table 3, excluding thestandard deviation for legibility. The rest of the ablation were not averaged on several seeds for computationalreasons. Recall that cvb stands for cropped, vertical lines, Bakker-like mask distribution, c+rhz standsfor cropped then resized, horizontal lines and Zhang-like masks, cvz stands for cropped, vertical lines andZhang-like masks and c+rvz stands for cropped then resized, vertical lines and Zhang-like masks.
Table 7: SSIM at 25% sampling rate, using SSIM, with the model of Bakker et al. (2020). This is the counterpartof the results shown in Table 6, where the acronyms used are explicited. Here, the results across short and longhorizon are comparable.
Table 8: AUC on the test set, using PSNR, for the full ablation study using the model of Bakker et al. (2020). Theshort and long horizon results are not comparable with each other, as AUCs are integrated on the whole rangeof sampling rates. The rest ablation were not averaged on several seeds for computational reasons. Recall thatcvb stands for cropped, vertical lines, Bakker-like mask distribution, c+rhz stands for cropped then resized,horizontal lines and Zhang-like masks, cvz stands for cropped, vertical lines and Zhang-like masks and c+rvzstands for cropped then resized, vertical lines and Zhang-like masks.
Table 9: PSNR at 25% sampling rate, using PSNR, with the model of Bakker et al. (2020). This is the counterpartof the results shown in Table 8, where the acronyms used are explicited. Here, the results across short and longhorizon are comparable.
Table 10: Approximate computational cost of the compared methods. Note that at test time, LBCS is basicallyfree while the RL policies will still need to be deployed. nr, np are the parameter counts of the reconstructionand sampling policies respectivelySetting	Num. lines ∣s∣	Max. cardinality N	Candidate set size k	Data batch size lShort horizon (Bakker et al., 2020)	128	16	128	256Long horizon (Bakker et al., 2020)	128	28	128	256(Pineda et al., 2020)	332	100	64	20(Pineda et al., 2020) "big"	332	48	200	256Table 11: The hyperparameters used for the stochastic LBCS masks throughout comparisons21Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Sampling rate(a)	PSNR vs sampling rate	(b) SSIM vs sampling rateFigure 7: PSNR and SSIM of LBCS with larger batch size (LBCS - big) trained on MSE, zoomed to the regionwhere the smaller batch size LBCS underperformed. Note that it fully matches or outperforms both versions ofDDQN on PSNR.
Table 11: The hyperparameters used for the stochastic LBCS masks throughout comparisons21Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Sampling rate(a)	PSNR vs sampling rate	(b) SSIM vs sampling rateFigure 7: PSNR and SSIM of LBCS with larger batch size (LBCS - big) trained on MSE, zoomed to the regionwhere the smaller batch size LBCS underperformed. Note that it fully matches or outperforms both versions ofDDQN on PSNR.
