Table 1: Heterophilious results. Averaged accuracy (%) for 100 runs. Best results outlined in boldand the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results are outlined in underlined bold.
Table 2: statistics of datasets.
Table 3: Results on homophilic benchmark datasets. Averaged accuracy (%) for 100 runs. Bestresults are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results areoutlined in underlined bold. OOM denotes out of memory.
Table 4: Results on cSBM with sparse splitting setting. Average accuracy (%) for 20 runs. Bestresults are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results areoutlined in underlined bold.
Table 5: Results on cSBM with dense splitting setting. Average accuracy (%) for 20 runs. Bestresults are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results areoutlined in underlined bold.
Table 6: Results on homophilic graphs with random edges. Average accuracy (%) for 20 runs. Bestresults are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results areoutlined in underlined bold. OOM denotes out of memory.
Table 7: Results on heterophilic graphs with random edges. Average accuracy (%) for 20 runs. Bestresults are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the best results areoutlined in underlined bold.
Table 8: The results of pGNNs + GCN and pGNNs + JKNet on homophilic benchmark dataset.
Table 9: The results of pGNNs + GCN and pGNNs + JKNet on heterophilic benchmark dataset.
Table 10: Results on PPI datasets. Averaged micro-F1 scores for 10 runs. Best results are outlinedin bold.
Table 11: Results on OGBN arXiv dataset. Average accuracy (%) for 10 runs. Best results areoutlined in bold.
Table 12: Efficiency on homophilic benchmark datasests. Averaged running time per epoch (ms) /averaged total running time (s). OOM denotes out of memory.
Table 13: Efficiency on heterophilic benchmark datasests. Averaged running time per epoch (ms) /averaged total running time (s).
Table 14: Results on heterophilic benchmark datasets for 64 hidden units. Averaged accuracy (%)for 20 runs. Best results outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of the bestresults are outlined in underlined bold.
Table 15: Results on homophilic benchmark datasets for 64 hidden units. Averaged accuracy (%)for 20 runs. Best results are outlined in bold and the results within 95% confidence interval of thebest results are outlined in underlined bold. OOM denotes out of memory.
