Table 1: Number of nonzero coefficients, `1 norm of coefficients, test set accuracy, and area un-der the receiver operating characteristic (AUC) for logistic regression models on the Adult Incomedataset as a function of inverse `1 penalty C .
Table 2: Test set accuracy and AUC for Explainable Boosting Machines on the Adult Income datasetas a function of max上ins parameter.
Table 3: Feature values that minimize log-odds for a logistic regression model (C = 0.01) overleaf 6 of the decision tree reference model. The 6 features that contribute most to the minimum areshown as a function of certification set radius r.
Table 4: Feature values that minimize log-odds for an Explainable Boosting Machine (max上ins= 8) over leaf 12 of the decision tree reference model. The 6 features that contribute most to theminimum are shown as a function of certification set radius r. For r > 0, the minimizing values ofcontinuous features form an interval because the corresponding functions fj are piecewise constant.
Table 5: Number of nonzero coefficients, `1 norm of coefficients, test set accuracy, and AUC forlogistic regression models on the Lending Club dataset as a function of inverse `1 penalty C.
Table 6: Test set accuracy and AUC for Explainable Boosting Machines on the Lending Club datasetas a function of max上ins parameter.
Table 7: Feature values that minimize log-odds for a logistic regression model (C = 0.01) over leaf5 of the decision tree reference model for the Lending Club dataset. The 6 features that contributemost to the minimum are shown as a function of certification set radius r.
Table 8: Feature values that minimize log-odds for an Explainable Boosting Machine (max上ins= 8) over leaf 5 of the decision tree reference model for the Lending Club dataset. The 6 featuresthat contribute most to the minimum are shown as a function of certification set radius r. For r > 0,the minimizing values of continuous features form an interval because the corresponding functionsfj are piecewise constant.
