Table 1: Quantitative Results on Online Clustering. Comparison of performance on clustering performanceacross different distributions. Reported error is the L2 distance between predicted and ground truth means.
Table 2: Quantitative Results on Image Domain. Comparison of entity-monitoring performance on MNISTand Airplane datasets across 10, 30, 50, 100 observations. For OBM-Net, LSTM and K-means we use aconvolutional encoder/decoder trained on the data. We train models with 30 observations and report MSE error.
Table 3: Quantitative Analysis of OBM-Net on Simulated Household Domain. Quantitative comparison ofOBM-Net with baselines across 3 studied household domain configurations across 10, 25, 50 observations.
Table A1: Abalation Analysis. We ablate each component of OBM-Net on the Normal distribution . Whenlearned memory is ablated, OBM-Net updates states based on observed values (appropriate in the Normaldistribution dataset).
Table A2: Performance on Large Number of Clusters. Comparison of performance on Normal distribution,when underlying distributions have a large number of components. We use 30 components, and train modelswith 50 observations. Each cluster observation and center is drawn between -1 and 1, with reported error as theL2 distance between predicted and ground truth means.
Table A3: Performance on Dynamic Objects. Comparison of different methods on estimating the state of 3dynamically moving objects. All learning models are trained with 1000 sequences of 30 observations. We reportMSE error. JPDA uses the ground-truth observation and dynamics models.
Table A4: Quantitative Results on iGibson. Comparison of performance of OBM-Net and baselines on theiGibson environment.
Table A5: Quantitative Results on Scanned Gibson Houses. Comparison of performance of OBM-Net andbaselines on scanned Gibson environment.
Table A6: Generalization with Increased Observations. Error of different models when executedat test time on different number of observations across different distributions. We train models with 3components and 30 observations.
