Table 1: Pearson’s correlation coefficient of the final Bellman error and value error of functions trained witheither only BRM or only FQE. Warm colors ■ are used to show positive correlation and cold colors ■ areused for negative correlation. The error terms are computed over the test dataset. The functions are trainedusing datasets of varying noise levels, where all refers to the set (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5) with 10 seeds, (6×10functions), 0.1 refers to the subset of functions trained on the 0.1 dataset (10 functions). While there is highcorrelation between the on-policy empirical Bellman error and value error when comparing functions trainedwith the same algorithm, this relationship is not strong when evaluated with an off-policy dataset.
Table 2: Pearson’s correlation coefficient of varying metrics and the value error of functions trained with.
Table 3: Pearson’s correlation coefficient of the final absolute Bellman error and absolute value error of func-tions trained With either only BRM or only FQE. Warm colors ■ are used to show positive correlation and coldcolors ■ are used for negative correlation. The error terms are computed over the test dataset. The functionsare trained using datasets of varying noise levels, where all refers to the set (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5) with 10seeds, (6×10 functions), 0.1 refers to the subset of functions trained on the 0.1 dataset (10 functions). This isa repeat of Table 1, comparing absolute Bellman error to absolute value error (rather than MSE Bellman error).
Table 4: Pearson’s correlation coefficient of the final mean squared Bellman error and mean squared value errorof functions trained with either only BRM or only FQE. Warm colors ■ are used to show positive correlationand cold colors ■ are used for negative correlation. The error terms are computed over the test dataset. Thefunctions are trained using datasets of varying noise levels, where all refers to the set (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5)with 10 seeds, (6×10 functions), 0.1 refers to the subset of functions trained on the 0.1 dataset (10 functions).
Table 5: Hyperparameters and architecture.
Table 6: Values of the per-environment normalizing constant K, used to normalize value error for better inter-pretability across tasks.
