Table 1: Average accuracy on all the experiences for the CORe50 and ImageNet-1000 NC scenarios.
Table 2: Final accuracy on CORe50 NC and NIC using original (NR-OD), generated (NR-GD), andrandom (NR-RD) data with negative replay. The results with no replay are reported as references.
Table 3: Final accuracy on ImageNet-1000 following the benchmark of Masana et al. (2020) with25 experiences composed of 40 classes each. For each method, a replay memory of 20,000 patternsis used (20 per class at the end of training). Results for other methods reported from Masana et al.
Table 4: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with no replay. Common hyper-parameters arethe same for each experience, 1st experience hyper-parameters are used in the first experience, thefollowing experience hyper-parameters are used in all the following experiences.
Table 5: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with replay (generative replay, random data, and realdata). Common hyper-parameters are the same for each experience, 1st experience hyper-parametersare used in the first experience, the following experience hyper-parameters are used in all the followingexperiences.
Table 6: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with no replay. Common hyper-parameters arethe same for each experience, 1st experience hyper-parameters are used in the first experience, thefollowing experience hyper-parameters are used in all the following experiences.
Table 7: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with replay (generative replay and real data).
Table 8: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with no replay. Common hyper-parameters arethe same for each experience, 1st experience hyper-parameters are used in the first experience, thefollowing experience hyper-parameters are used in all the following experiences.
Table 9: Hyper-parameters of the model trained with replay (generative replay, random data, and realdata). Common hyper-parameters are the same for each experience, 1st experience hyper-parametersare used in the first experience, the following experience hyper-parameters are used in all the followingexperiences.
Table 10: Hyper-parameters of the generative model trained on CORe50 NC. Common hyper-parameters are the same for each experience, while following experience hyper-parameters are usedin all the experiences except the first one.
Table 11: Hyper-parameters of the generative model trained on ImageNet-1000 NC. Common hyper-parameters are the same for each experience, while following experience hyper-parameters are usedin all the experiences except the first one.
Table 12: Hyper-parameters of the generative model trained on CORe50 NIC. Common hyper-parameters are the same for each experience, while following experience hyper-parameters are usedin all the experiences except the first one.
