Table 1: Differences between zero-shot learning (ZSL), compositional ZSL (CZSL), few-shot learning(FSL), and our newly proposed few-shot attribute learning (FSAL). Our task requires the model to gener-alize to new attributes.
Table 2: 5- and 20-shot attribute learning results on Celeb-A and Zappos-50K. We compare standard FSLmethods to variants of our approach. Representation learning based on class identity or attribute labels are out-performed by unsupervised methods that fine-tune using attribute or episode labels. Methods can be supervisedby 1) “E”=episode binary labels, 2) “A”=attributes, and 3) “C”=face identity. The best is bolded and thesecond best is underlined.
Table 3: Combination of different representation & few-shot learners on 20-shot attribute learning. Ourproposed representation learning plus a simple logistic regression (LR) is consistently the best. Note: Meta-NN= MatchingNet, Meta-NC = ProtoNet, Meta-LR = MAML/ANIL.
Table 4: Comparison of representation learning methods Table 5: Number of projection layers (L)with respect to their ability to predict training and test- during finetuning, and whether they are dis-ing attributes. Standard methods such as ProtoNet and SA carded (D) during testing. Numbers are fromperform well on training attributes but do not transfer well to Celeb-A 20-shot. ∆ denotes changes comparednovel ones (large training vs. test gaps in red).	to no finetuning.
Table 6: 5- and 20-shot attribute learning re- Table 7: 20-shot FSAL on Im- Table 8: Training vs. test at-sults on ImageNet. Learners uses logistic re- ageNet with different few-shot tributes of 20-shot FSAL onlearners.
Table 9: Celeb-A attribute readout performance of different representations, measured in mean AUC. RNDdenotes using a randomly initialized CNN; PN denotes ProtoNet.
Table 10: Effect of the L1 regularizer on different representations for the validation set of Celeb-A 20-shot.
Table 11: ImageNet-with-Attributes attribute readout binary prediction performance of different representa-tions, measured in mean AUC.
Table 12: Attribute Splits for Celeb-AThese modifications leave us with a total of 79 values (across all higher-level categories). Not allimages are tagged with a value from each category, while some are even tagged with more than onevalue from the same category (e.g. two different materials used in different parts of the shoe). Wesplit these values into 40 ‘training attributes’ and 39 ‘val/test attributes’.
Table 13: Attribute splits for Zappos-50KTrain	pink shiny metallic	spotted rough wooden	wet striped gray	blue white	brown	green	violet	redVal/Test	orange	yellow	furry	black	vegetation	smooth		Table 14: Attribute Splits for ImageNet-with-AttributesG Few- S hot Attribute Learning Toy ProblemIn this section, we present a toy problem that illustrates the challenges introduced by the FSALsetting and the failures of existing approaches on this task. This simple problem captures the coreelements of our FSAL tasks, including ambiguity, introducing novel attributes at test time, and therole of learning good representations. The primary limitation of this model is the fact that it is fullylinear and the attribute values are independent—in a more realistic FSAL task recovering a goodrepresentation from the data is significantly more challenging, and the data points will have a morecomplex relationship with the attributes as in our benchmark datasets.
Table 14: Attribute Splits for ImageNet-with-AttributesG Few- S hot Attribute Learning Toy ProblemIn this section, we present a toy problem that illustrates the challenges introduced by the FSALsetting and the failures of existing approaches on this task. This simple problem captures the coreelements of our FSAL tasks, including ambiguity, introducing novel attributes at test time, and therole of learning good representations. The primary limitation of this model is the fact that it is fullylinear and the attribute values are independent—in a more realistic FSAL task recovering a goodrepresentation from the data is significantly more challenging, and the data points will have a morecomplex relationship with the attributes as in our benchmark datasets.
