Table 1: Performance comparison on real-world data sets. The best is marked in bold red and thesecond best is marked in Underline blue. The objectives are defined in Section 3.1.
Table 2: Naming conventions for objectives and loss functionsSelection variant / CI	C I vol_sum	C I vol_min	C I vol_max	C I plainsort	Osort	Lsort vol_sum , vol_sum	Osort	Lsort vol_min , vol_min	Osort	Lsort vol_max ,	vol_max	Osort Lsort plain , plain Ostd Lstd plain , plainstd	Ostd	Lstd vol_sum , vol_sum	Ostd	Lstd vol_min , vol_min	Ostd	Lstd vol_max , vol_max	naive	Onaive	Lnaive vol_sum , vol_sum	Onaive	Lnaive vol_min , vol_min	Onaive Lnaive vol_max ,	vol_max	Onaive Lnaive plain , plain0.51.00.40.80.30.60.40.20.20.00.00.20.30.0(a) DSBM(“complete", F,
Table 3: Summary statistics for the real-world networks.
Table 4: Performance comparison on Telegram. The best is marked in bold red and the second bestis marked in Underline blue.
Table 5: Performance comparison on Blog. The best is marked in bold red and the second best ismarked in Underline blue.
Table 6: Performance comparison on Migration. The best is marked in bold red and the second bestis marked in Underline blue. InfoMaP results are omitted here as it predicts a single huge cluster andcould not generate imbalance results.
Table 7: Performance comparison on WikiTalk. The best is marked in bold red and the second best ismarked in Underline blue. InfoMap results are omitted here as its large number of predicted clustersleads to memory error in imbalance calculation.
Table 8: Performance comparison on Lead-Lag for year 2015. The best is marked in bold red andthe second best is marked in Underline blue. InfoMaP results are omitted here as it usually predicts asingle huge cluster and could not generate imbalance results.
Table 9: Performance comparison on Lead-Lag. Results in each year is averaged over ten runs. Meanand standard deviation (after ±) are calculated over the 19 years. The best is marked in bold red andthe second best is marked in Underline blue. InfoMap results are omitted here as it usually predicts asingle huge cluster and could not generate imbalance results.
Table 10: Performance comparison on Lead-Lag, where we evaluate the performance distance to thebest one in each year. Results in each year is averaged over ten runs. Mean and standard deviation(after ±) are calculated over the 19 years. The best is marked in bold red and the second best ismarked in Underline blue. InfoMaP results are omitted here as it usually predicts a single huge clusterand could not generate imbalance results.
Table 11: Performance comparison on Migration (without preprocessing). The best is marked inbold red and the second best is marked in Underline blue.
Table 12: Performance comparison on Lead-Lag, including Louvain and Leiden. Results in each yearis averaged over ten runs. Mean and standard deviation (after ±) are calculated over the 19 years.
