Table 1: Published benchmarks for sequential MNIST, permuted MNIST, and sequential CIFAR10best test accuracy. Networks are grouped into three categories: baselines, best performing RNNswith claimed stability guarantee*, and networks achieving the current SOTA on each task. Withineach grouping, networks are ordered by number of trainable parameters (for CIFAR10 if it differedacross tasks). Our network is highlighted. Where possible, we include information on repeatability.
Table S1: Training hyperparameter tuning trials, presented in chronological order. * indicates thattraining was cut short by the 24 hour Colab runtime limit. LR Schedule describes the scalar thelearning rate was multiplied by, and at what epochs. The best performing network is highlighted,and represents the training settings we used throughout most of the main text.
Table S2:	Results for combination networkscontaining different numbers of component16-unit RNNs. Training hyperparametersand network initialization settings were keptthe same across all trials.
Table S3:	Results for different distributionsof 352 total units across a combination net-work. This number was chosen based onprior 22 × 16 network performance. For eachcomponent RNN size tested, the same proce-dure was used to select appropriate densityand scalar settings.
Table S4:	Results for different initialization settings - varying sparsity and magnitude of the compo-nent RNNs for different network sizes.
Table S5:	Further optimizing the sparsity settings for high performance using a 16×32 network. Thefinal scalar is the product of the pre-selection and post-selection scalars. Note that the 5% densityand 7.5 scalar network was killed after 18 epochs due to exploding gradient.
Table S6:	Additional hyperparameter tuning for the CIFAR10 task, presented in chronological order.
Table S7: Results from pilot testing on the sparsity of negative feedback connections in a 24 × 32Sparse Combo Net. Feedback Density refers to the percentage of possible subnetwork pairings thatwere trained in negative feedback, while the remaining inter-network connections were held at 0.
