Table 1: Classification accuracy (%) of four defense models on CIFAR-10 against various white-box attackswith different optimizers, including vanilla gradient descent (PGD), momentum (MI-FGSM), nesterov acceler-ated gradient (NI-FGSM), Adam, Adv-CNN, and the learned optimizer (BMA).
Table 2: Classification accuracy (%) of four defenses on CIFAR-10 against PGDCE, PGDDLR, MT, ODI-R10,APGDDLR and their extensions by integrating with our proposed BMA method. The default attack iterationsare set as T = 20 as detailed in Sec. 4.1, and we also involve another 100-step APGDDLR as APGDDLR-100.
Table 3: Cross-model generalization performance of four unseen defenses on CIFAR-10, while the optimizeris trained on four random defenses from TRADES (T), AWP (A), Unlabeled (U), Hydra (H), and SAT (S).
Table 4: Classification accuracy (%) of different defenses on CIFAR-10 under various white-box attacks. Thedefenses marked With * adopt additional unlabeled datasets. The defenses marked With * adopt e = 0.031 asoriginally reported, and the others adopt = 8/255. ∆ represents the difference between reported accuracyand testing accuracy by ours. ∆0 represents the difference betWeen accuracy under the best attack and ours.
Table 5: Classification accuracy (%) of different defenses on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet under various white-box attacks. We directly apply the learned optimizer in MAMA on CIFAR-10 Without further training.
Table 6: We summarize the architectures and code links for the referred defense methods.
Table 7: Classification accuracy (%) of defense models on CIFAR-10 against various white-boxattacks with different optimizers, including PGD, MI-FGSM, NI-FGSM, Adam and the learnedoptimizer (BMA), based on the `2 norm.
Table 8: Standard deviations of multiple runs on CIFAR-10 against PGDCW and its extension beintegrating with our proposed BMA method.
Table 9: Testing the performance for different μ.
Table 10: Testing the performance of different numbers of meta-train and meta-test.
Table 11: Classification accuracy (%) of defense models on CIFAR-10 against MAMA with fixedor automatic step sizes.
Table 12: Classification accuracy (%) of different types of defense models on CIFAR-10 againstvarious white-box attacks.
