Table 1: Task and Goal-Condition Success Rate. ✓ denotes the use of the corresponding attribute by thegiven approach and X denotes the absence of the corresponding attribute. "Input” column represents the variousinput modalities used by the given approach. “Single” and “Box” under “RGB” column denotes that the visualfeatures are either extracted from the entire image or bounding box predictions respectively. “Goal” and “Instr”columns indicates the use of high-level goal instruction and detailed step-by-step instructions by the givenapproach respectively. “Supervision” column provides details about the presence or absence of an additionalsupervision in training the corresponding approach apart from the primitive actions and object masks. “Depth”column denotes depth maps of RGB images and “Subgoal” denotes the high-level subgoal actions. We providethe highest values corresponding to each fold and each metric in blue and bold.
Table 2: Ablation study for contributions of HACR. For each metric, we report the task success rate. Theabsence of a checkmark (✓) denotes that the corresponding component is removed from HACR. Here, the‘Modular interaction policy’ refers to the 7 subgoal modules, ‘Navigation interaction hier.’ denotes the hierar-chy between navigation and interaction policy (Sec. 3), and ‘Object encoding module’ is introduced in 3.2.2.
Table 3: Ablation study for design components of HACR. For each metric, we report the success rate.
Table 4: Input Ablations and LEM Ablation. We ablate different inputs to our hierarchical network andreport the task success rates and GC success rates. Kindly refer Sec. A.4.2 for further detailsA.4.2 Input AblationTo further investigate our agent’s vision and language bias, we ablate the inputs to our model inTable 4.
Table 5: Success rates across seven task types in ALFRED. ‘Seq2Seq’ refers to the method by Shridhar et al.
Table 6: Subgoal success rate. The highest values per fold and task are shown in blue.
Table 7: Input Ablations for policy composition controller (PCC). “PCC w/o vision” denotes the originalHACR agent, where as “PCC w/ vision” denotes the agent using additional visual input for Policy CompositionController (PCC) The highest values per fold and task are shown in blue. The second column depicts theperformance of PCC for predicting the subgoal sequence evaluated on validation set.
Table 8: Input Ablations for Master Policy (MP). “MP w/ vision” denotes the original HACR agent, whereas “MP w/o vision” denotes the agent without visual input for Master Policy (MP). The highest values per foldand task are shown in blue.
