Table 1: Verification results from applying Ab Initio objective function of Equation (2) to multipleMCMC optimization tasks with analytically known optimal properties. The reference problem usedfor coefficient fitting is shown in bold. Value means are reported to at most the first significant digitof standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 2: Comparison of sampling performance obtained optimizing the multi-scheme proposals ofEquation (3) using various objective functions. Results are reported for two choices for the numberof coupling layers used in the proposal’s normalizing flow (L = 8 and L = 3). Value means arereported to at most the first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 3: Comparison of number of gradient evaluations computed per second when optimizing themulti-scheme proposals of Equation (3) using various objective functions. Value means are reportedto at most the first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 4: Comparison of sampling performance obtained optimizing augmented multi-scheme propos-als of Equation (3) using various objective functions targeting posterior distributions of parametersfor logistic regression of UCI datasets. Value means are reported to at most the first significant digitof standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 5: Comparison of number of gradient evaluations computed per second when optimizingthe multi-scheme proposals of Equation (3) using various objective functions targeting posteriordistributions of parameters for logistic regression of UCI dataset. Value means are reported to at mostthe first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 6: Comparison of sampling performances and Ab Initio losses (lower is better) obtained fromvarious MCMC schemes for the logistic regression of MNIST digits (d=785). Value means arereported to at most the first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 7: Verification results from applying MSJD maximization to the MCMC optimization taskswith analytically known optimal properties. As these verification tasks are set within the diffusionarylimit, MSJD recovers known optimal results. Value means are reported to at most the first significantdigit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 8: Verification results from applying L2HMC’s objective to the MCMC optimization taskswith analytically known optimal properties. L2HMC’s objective only recovers optimal behavior forMALA proposals and cannot be used to optimize RWM proposals with a uniform target. Value meansare reported to at most the first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 9: Verification results from applying GSM targeting acceptance rates of 0.3 to the MCMCoptimization tasks with analytically known optimal properties. Optimal behavior is approximatelyrecovered only for RWM proposals at this acceptance rate. Value means are reported to at most thefirst significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 10: Verification results from applying GSM targeting acceptance rates of 0.6 to the MCMCoptimization tasks with analytically known optimal properties. Optimal behavior is approximatelyrecovered only for MALA proposals at this acceptance rate. Value means are reported to at most thefirst significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 11: Verification results from applying GSM targeting acceptance rates of 0.9 to the MCMCoptimization tasks with analytically known optimal properties. Results are significantly suboptimal.
Table 12: Comparison of sampling performance obtained optimizing the position-dependent mixtureproposals of Equation (4) using various objective functions. Value means are reported to at most thefirst significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 13: Specification of network parameters used in multi-scheme proposals for logistic regressionsampling tasks.
Table 14: Results from optimizing multi-scheme proposal distributions targeting posterior distributionof logistic regression weights for German Credit dataset. Value means are reported to at most the firstsignificant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 15: Results from optimizing multi-scheme proposal distributions targeting posterior distributionof logistic regression weights for Australian Credit dataset. Value means are reported to at most thefirst significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 16: Results from optimizing multi-scheme proposal distributions targeting posterior distributionof logistic regression weights for Heart dataset. Value means are reported to at most the first significantdigit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 17: Results from optimizing multi-scheme proposal distributions targeting posterior distributionof logistic regression weights for Pima dataset. Value means are reported to at most the first significantdigit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 18: Results from optimizing multi-scheme proposal distributions targeting posterior distributionof logistic regression weights for Ripley dataset. Value means are reported to at most the firstsignificant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
Table 19: Comparison of sampling performance obtained optimizing augmented multi-schemeproposals of Equation (3) using online adaptive procedure of Algorithm 2 and various objectivefunctions targeting posterior distributions of parameters for logistic regression of UCI datasets. Valuemeans are reported to at most the first significant digit of standard error (reported in parentheses).
