Table 1: 3D Shape classification and shape retrieval results on ModelNet40 dataset. We com-pare the classification and retrieval performance of our model with existing methods on the Model-Net40 dataset. Our model is trained without any supervision of ground truth but still outperformsmost of the supervised methods on classification accuracy and retrieval mAP. “(Go.)” represents themethods use GoogLeNet as backbone network.
Table 2: Rotation Robustness of 3D Methods. We test our model’s robustness against rotationsaround Y-axis (vertical to the ground) on ModelNet40. Without using the ground truth supervision,our model with 6 and 12 views configuration performs the highest level of robustness to 90。and180° rotation among all methods.
Table 3: Effect of Number of Views: We examine the effect of different numbers of training andtesting views. ”Training V.” indicates the number of views used during the network training, and”Testing V.” indicates the number of views used during the inference period. Our network achievesan impressive accuracy even if only two testing views are applied, where ”Our (GVCNN)” indicatesthe GCVNN based network and ”Our (MVCNN)” indicates the MVCNN based network.
Table 4: 3D Shape classification and retrieval results on ScanObjectNN dataset. We comparethe classification and retrieval performance of our model with previous methods on the ScanOb-jectNN dataset. Our model is trained without any supervision of ground truth but still outperformsmost of the supervised methods on classification accuracy.
Table 5: Effect of Different Augmentation We investigate the effect of different augmentationsthat are adopted during our experiment. Our model is insensitive to rotation augmentation.
Table 6: Effect of Unsupervised Loss We investigate the effect of our proposed adversarial attackby comparing it With a supervised version.
Table 7: Effect of Adversarial Views. Comparison betWeen our method and random rotation inadversarial vieW generation.
Table 8:	Effect of Adversarial Attack Steps. OUrs-i represents the nUmber of adversarial attackadopted dUring training.
Table 9:	Computational Overhead Comparison. Please note the time reported in this table forMVCNN and GVCNN exclUde the time cost by the offline rendering process. OUrs(MVCNN) andOUrs(GVCNN) denotes the different backbone networks.
