Table 1: Main domain shifts results. LISA outperforms prior methods on all five datasets. Followingthe instructions of Koh et al. (2021), we report the performance of Camelyon17 over 10 differentseeds and the results of other datasets are obtained over 3 different seeds.
Table 2: Results of subpopulation shifts. Here, we show the average and worst group accuracy. Werepeat the experiments three times and put full results with standard deviation in Table 16.
Table 3: Compared LISA with substitute mixup strategies in domain shifts.
Table 4: Compared LISA with substitute mixup strategies in subpopulation shifts. UW representsupweighting. Full results with standard deviation is listed in Table 17.
Table 5: Effects of the degree of distributionshifts w.r.t. the performance. Distance repre-sents the distribution distance between train-ing and test domains.
Table 6: Results of representation-level invariance (×108), wheresmaller values denote strongerinvariance w.r.t. labels.
Table 7: Results of the analysis ofprediction-level invariance. Smallervalues denote stronger invariance.
Table 8: Dataset Statistics for Domain Shifts.
Table 9: Hyperparameter settings for the domain shifts.
Table 10: Full Results of Camelyon17. We report both validation accuracy and test accuracy.
Table 11: Full Results of FMoW. Here, we report the average accuracy and the worst-domain accu-racy on both validation and test sets.
Table 12: Full Results of RxRx1. ID: in-distribution; OOD: out-of-distribution	Validation Acc.	Test ID Acc.	Test OOD Acc.
Table 13: Full Results of Amazon. Both the average accuracy and the 10th Percentile accuracy arereported.
Table 14: Dataset Statistics for Subpopulation Shifts. All datasets are binary classification tasks andwe use the worst group accuracy as the evaluation metric.
Table 15: Hyperparameter settings for the subpopulation shifts.
Table 16: Full results of subpopulation shifts with standard deviation. All the results are performedwith three random seed.
Table 17: Full table of the comparison between LISA and other substitute mixup strategies in sub-population shifts. UW represents upweighting.
Table 18: Results on Datasets without Spurious CorrelationsDataset	ERM	Vanilla mixup	LISACMNIST	73.67%	74.28%	73.18%Waterbirds	88.07%	88.23%	87.05%CelebA	86.11%	88.89%	87.22%B Proofs of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2Outline of the proof. We will first find the mis-classification errors based on the population versionof OLS with different mixup strategies. Next, we will develop the convergence rate of the empiricalOLS based on n samples towards its population version. These two steps together give us theempirical mis-classification errors of different methods. We will separately show that the upperbounds in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 hold for two strategies of LISA and hence hold for any psel ∈[0, 1]. Let L1 denote selection strategy I of LISA method and L2 denote selection strategy II ofLISA method.
