Table 1: Blind classification with missing data on the binary MNIST dataset with feature deletionnoise according to Globerson and Roweis (2006), averaged over all pairs of digits.
Table 2: Data distribution over the space X × Y = {0, 1}2 × {0, 1} that serves as the example forthe sub-optimality of classification through data-imputation (proof of claim 3).
Table 3: Blind classification with missing data on the binary MNIST dataset with feature deletionnoise according to Globerson and Roweis (2006), averaged over all pairs of digits.
Table 4: Blind classification with missing data on the multi-class MNIST dataset, generated accord-ing to i.i.d. corruption with probability p for each pixel. (*) Accuracies are estimated from theplot presented in GoodfelloW et al. (2013). (f) Data imputation algorithms followed by a standardConvNet.
Table 5: Blind classification with missing data on the multi-class MNIST dataset, generated accord-ing to missing rectangles corruption with N missing rectangles, each of width and hight equal to W.
Table 6: Blind classification with missing data on the multi-class NORB dataset, generated accord-ing to i.i.d. corruption with probability p for each pixel. (f) Data imputation algorithms followed bya standard ConvNet.
Table 7: Blind classification with missing data on the multi-class NORB dataset, generated accord-ing to missing rectangles corruption with N missing rectangles, each of width and hight equal to W.
Table 8: We compare ConvNets on the MNIST dataset, trained on i.i.d. corruption with probabilityptrain while tested on i.i.d. corruption with probability ptest. Additionally, we trained ConvNetson either i.i.d. or missing rectangles corruption distributions with random corruption parameterssampled for each batch of training samples, while testing on i.i.d. corruption with the fixed parameterptest.
Table 9: We compare ConvNets on the MNIST dataset, train and tested on the same (fixed) missingrectangles distribution, against ConvNets trained on randomly chosen missingness distributions fromeither the missing rectangles or i.i.d. corruption distributions.
