Table 1: Comparison of mean L2 norm and RMSD between the original images and the generatedadversarial examples for the different attacks. Time to attack is the mean number of seconds it takesto generate 1000 adversarial examples using the given attack method (with the same number ofoptimization iterations for each attack).
Table 2: L2 Optimization Classifier Attack on MNIST: fclass accuracy on adversarial examplesagainst the VAE-GAN for each target class (middle row) and the matching rate between the predic-tions fclass made and the adversarial target class (bottom row). The adversarial examples success-fully fool fclass into predicting the target class almost 100% of the time, which makes this attackseem like a strong attack, but the attack actually fails to generate good reconstructions in many cases.
Table 3: L2 Optimization Latent Attack on MNIST (single latent vector target):ASignore-target (AStarget in parentheses) after one reconstruction loop for different source andtarget class pairs on the VAE-GAN model. The latent representation of a random image from thetarget class is used to generate the target latent vector. Higher values indicate more successful attacksagainst the generative model.
Table 4: L2 Optimization Classifier Attack on MNIST: ASignore-target (AStarget in parenthe-ses) for all source and target class pairs using adversarial examples generated on the VAE-GANmodel. Higher values indicate more successful attacks against the generative model.
Table 5: L2 Optimization LVAE Attack on MNIST (single image target): ASignore-target(AStarget in parentheses) for different source and target class pairs using adversarial examplesgenerated on the VAE-GAN model. Higher values indicate more successful attacks against thegenerative model.
Table 6: L2 Optimization LVAE Attack (mean reconstruction target): ASignore-target(AStarget in parentheses) for all source and target class pairs using adversarial examples gener-ated on the VAE-GAN model. The mean reconstruction image for each target class (over all of theimages of that class in the training set) is used as the target reconstruction. Higher values indicatemore successful attacks against the generative model.
Table 7: L2 Optimization Latent Attack (mean latent vector target): ASignore-target (AStargetin parentheses) for all source and target class pairs using adversarial examples generated on theVAE-GAN model. The mean latent vector for each target class (over all of the images of that classin the training set) is used as the target latent vector. Higher values indicate more successful attacksagainst the generative model.
Table 8: L2 Optimization LVAE Attack (mean reconstruction target): ASignore-target(AStarget in parentheses) for all source and target class pairs using adversarial examples gener-ated on the VAE-GAN model. The mean image for each target class (over all of the images of thatclass in the training set) is used as the target. Higher values indicate more successful attacks againstthe generative model.
Table 9: L2 Optimization LVAE Attack on MNIST (single image target): ASignore-target(AStarget in parentheses) for different source and target class pairs using adversarial examplesgenerated on the VAE-GAN model. Higher values indicate more successful attacks against thegenerative model.
Table 10: L2 Optimization Latent Attack on SVHN (single latent vector target):ASignore-target (AStarget in parentheses) after one reconstruction loop for different source andtarget class pairs on the VAE-GAN model. The latent representation of a random image from thetarget class is used to generate the target latent vector. Higher values indicate more successful attacksagainst the generative model.
Table 11: L2 Optimization LVAE Attack on SVHN (single image target): ASignore-target(AStarget in parentheses) after one reconstruction loop for different source and target class pairson the VAE-GAN model. The latent representation of a random image from the target class isused to generate the target latent vector. Higher values indicate more successful attacks against thegenerative model.
