Table 1: Functional study of clustering measures3.3	Extracting refined voice representation by using clustering groupsThis part of the protocol corresponds to the step 3 described in the Figure 2. Once the clusteringalgorithm is complete, we build for each k-value a new neural network using the same neural archi-tecture as used for the p-vector. Instead of predicting the initial labels, this new network is trainedto predict the refined labels r ∈ R using the clustering algorithm. After training, we can extractfrom its last layer a representation of the provided record that we name p-refined-vectors. The usedarchitecture is exactly the same as for the step 1 since this neural network is also firstly pre-trainedon a speaker identification task by using Voxceleb 2. Only the last layer of the p-vector network ischanged to correspond to the number k of groups (of the refined labels r) instead of the number ofcharacter labels l.
Table 2: Results obtained for each k value by using the recordings of MassEffect for the whole labelrefining protocol. The v-measure and purity-K measures are computed on the clusters extractedfrom the p-vectors. Accuracies are computed on validation (siamese val) and test (siamese test) setsof Sn by using the siamese networks trained with the refined p-vectors.
Table 3: Results obtained for each k value by replacing MassEffect 3 with Skyrim recordings duringthe step 2. The v-measure and purity-K measures are computed on the clusters extracted from thep-vectors. Accuracies are computed on validation (siamese val) and test (siamese test) sets of Sn byusing the siamese networks trained with the refined p-vectors.
Table 4: Results obtained for each k value by replacing MassEffect 3 with Skyrim recordings duringthe step 2. Cosine and Mahalanobis distances are used instead of Euclidean. The v-measure andpurity-K measures are computed on the clusters extracted from the p-vectors. Accuracies are com-puted on validation (siamese val) and test (siamese test) sets of Sn by using the siamese networkstrained with the refined p-vectors.
