Table 1: Overview of the previous works. We regard a method as unsupervised if the checked taskscan be learned only via shape supervision during training.
Table 2: Part segmentation performance in label IoU. Higher is better. The starred numbers indicatethe failure of part decomposition and that only one recovered part represents the entire shape. Theaverage and the predefined maximum numbers of recovered parts or primitives are shown before andafter the slash, in the last column. Ours uses more than one part on average with the least number.
Table 3: Part pose estimation performance in EPE. Loweris better.
Table 4: Reconstruction performance. Chamfer L1 distance (CD1) and the number of parameters(# of params.) are scaled by 102 and 105, respectively. The average and the predefined maximumnumbers of recovered parts or primitives are shown before and after the slash, in the last column.
Table 5: Ablation study of the losses and the category-common decoders: ”w/o CP” and ”w/o CS”means disabling the category-common pose decoder and the shape decoders, respectively.
Table 6: Comparison between the point cloudinput types: complete shape and depth map.
Table 7: Number of samples per category ineach data sPlit. Each samPle is augmented bytransforming its Part Pose to generate 100 in-stances. Numbers in a Parethnesis in the lastcolumn indicates the ground truth number offixed, Prismatic and revolute tyPe Parts.
Table 8: Part segmentation performance. We use all the instances in the training set to assign alabel to each part as well as to the primitives. ”Canonical” denotes the mean label IoU only usingthe canonically posed instances of the training for the label assignment. ”Difference” shows theperformance drop from the setting that uses all the instances in the training set to the setting thatuses only the canonically posed instances. The average and the predefined maximum numbers ofrecovered parts or primitives are shown before and after the slash, in the last column. Our methodachieves the same level of the label efficiency with Neural Parts with higher part segmentationperformance.
Table 9: Part segmentation performance in label IoU withthe aligned number of parts for all methods (N = 8). Thestarred numbers indicate the failure of part decompositionand that only one recovered part represents the entire shape.
Table 10: Evaluation results of the number of assignedreconstructed parts to the ground-truth parts and the parttype accuracy. ”# of assigned parts” shows the numberof reconstructed parts assigned to the ground-truth parts,and ”Part type accuracy” shows the percentage of partkinematic type matches between the ground-truth and theassigned reconstructed parts.
Table 11: Reconstruction performance. Chamfer L1 and the number of parameters (# of params.)are scaled by 102 and 105, respectively. The average and the predefined maximum numbers ofrecovered parts or primitives are shown before and after the slash, in the last column.
Table 12: w/o Lrcec indicates dis-abling the second term of Equation2 and w/o indicates disabling use ofmultiple constant vectors.
Table 13: The number of used constant vectors for thecategory-common pivot points {qic | i ∈ Ar}. The maxi-mum number is Nqt = 4.
