Table 1: The comparison of top-1 test accuracy among different approaches on Digits. We run FLapproaches for 100 rounds (all approaches have converged). We run three trials and report the meanand standard derivation. Besides the test accuracy on each party, we also report the mean accuracy ofall parties denoted as “AVG”.
Table 2: The communication round and communication cost of each approach to achieve the sametarget performance as the minimum converged accuracy among FedAvg, FedBN, FedProx, andADCOL as shown in Table 1 (i.e., 94.1% in MNIST). We use the slash cell to indicate that theapproach cannot reach the target performance in 100 rounds/30 GB. The speedup is computed bydividing the communication size of FedAvg by the communication size of ADCOL.
Table 3: The statistics of all studied datasets.
Table 4: The comparison of top-1 test accuracy among different approaches on Caltech-10.
Table 5: The comparison of top-1 test accuracy among different approaches on DomainNet.
Table 6: The communication round and communication cost of each approach to achieve the sametarget performance on Caltech-10.
Table 7: The communication round and communication cost of each approach to achieve the sametarget performance on DomainNet.
Table 8: The performance of different approaches varying the sampling rate. We run all approachesfor 200 rounds and report the final mean accuracy and standard deviation with three runs.
Table 9: ADCOL with different discriminator architectures.
Table 10: ADCOL with different number of discriminators.
Table 11: The test accuracy of ADCOL with different representation dimensions.
Table 12: The test accuracy of different approaches on non-IID label settings.
Table 13: The performance of differerent approaches in the imbalanced data size setting.
Table 14: The total training time of running all approaches for 100 rounds.
Table 15: The comparison between sharing the predictor layers and not sharing the predictor layers.
Table 16: ADCOL with different representation sampling rates. We present the final converged meanaccuracy and the number of communication rounds and communication costs to achieve the targetaccuracy 78%.
Table 17: Differentially private ADCOL.
Table 18: The comparison between SOLO, ADCOL, and FADA on Digits.
