Table 1: The untargeted attack success rate (%) of baseline attacks with RAP. The results withCE loss are reported. The best results are bold and the second best results are underlined.
Table 2: The untargeted attack success rate (%) of combinational methods with RAP. The re-sults with CE loss are reported. The best results are bold and the second best results are underlined.
Table 3: The targeted attack success rate (%) of baseline methods with RAP. The results withlogit loss are reported. The best results are bold and the second best results are underlined.
Table 5: The comparison with ILA and LinBP. We useResNet-50 as surrogate model. The best results arebold.
Table 6: The comparison with TTPon targeted attack. The best resultsare bold.
Table 4: The targeted attack success rate (%) of combinational methods with RAP. The resultswith logit loss are reported. The best results are bold and the second best results are underlined.
Table 7: The evaluation on diverse network architectures and defense models.
Table 8: The untargeted attack success rate (%) of I* with RAP. The results with CE loss and400 iterations are reported. The best results are bold and the second best results are underlined.
Table 9: The evaluation of ensemble attacks on two AT models and Feature Noising.
Table 10: The evaluation of ensemble attacks on defense models With NRP.
Table 11: The evaluation of ensemble attacks on defense models with R&P.
Table 12: The comparison between EOT and our method.
Table 13: The targeted attack success rate (%) of combinational methods with RAP. The resultswith CE loss and 400 iterations are reported. The best results are bold and the second best resultsare underlined.
Table 14: The evaluation of ensemble attacks on diverse network architectures.
Table 15: The targeted attack success rate (%) of all baseline attacks with our method. The resultswith logit loss and 10/100/200/300/400 iterations are reported. We highlight the results with K =400 in bold.
Table 16: The untargeted attack success rate (%) of all baseline attacks with RAP. The results withCE loss and 10/100/200/300/400 iterations are reported. We highlight the results with K = 400 inbold.
