Table 1: Comparing performance in terms of final average test Accuracy (%) (higher is better), Forgetting(lower is better) and Learning Accuracy (LA (%)) (higher is better) of the existing baselines with TAG-RMSProp on all four datasets. All metrics are averaged across 5 runs. Overall, TAG-RMSProp outperforms allother methods in terms of Accuracy. *MTL assumes that the whole dataset from all tasks is always availableduring training, hence it is a different setting and its accuracy acts as an upper bound.
Table 2: Dataset Statistics	Input size	Training samples per task	Test samples per taskSplit-CIFAR100	3 × 32 × 32	2500	500Split-miniImageNet	3 × 84 × 84	2400	600Split-CUB	3 × 224 × 224	300	290In 5-dataset, we convert all the monochromatic images to RGB format depending on the task dataset. Allimages are then resized to 3 × 32 × 32. The overall training and test data statistics of 5-dataset are describedin Table 3.
Table 3: 5-dataset statistics.
Table 4: Comparing performance in terms of final average test Accuracy (%) (higher is better) and BWT(higher is better) with the standard deviation values for different existing methods with TAG-RMSProp for allfour datasets. All metrics are averaged across 5 runs.
Table 5: Comparing performance in terms of Final average test Accuracy (%) (higher is better), Forgetting(lower is better) and Learning Accuracy (LA (%)) (higher is better) with the standard deviation valuesfor different existing methods with TAG-RMSProp running for 5 epochs per task for all four datasets (seeSection 4). All metrics are averaged across 5 runs. *MTL assumes that the dataset from all tasks are alwaysavailable during training, hence it is a different setting and its accuracy acts as an upper bound.
Table 6: Comparing performance in terms of Final average test Accuracy (%) (higher is better), Forgetting(lower is better) and Learning Accuracy (LA (%)) (higher is better) with the standard deviation values forA-GEM and ER for different number of samples per class (M) in the episodic memory with TAG-RMSPropfor all four datasets (see Section 4). All metrics are averaged across 5 runs. Overall, ER with bigger memoryoutperforms all other methods in terms of Accuracy.
