Table 1: Table comparing different recourse methods across various cost and distance metrics (Sec-tion 5.1). The numbers reported are averaged across 5 different runs. For all the metrics higher isbetter except for PAC where lower is better. Refer to section 5.2 for more details.
Table 2: Ablation results with Search algorithms trained on different objectives (Section 5.2).
Table 3: Fairness analysis of recourse methods for subgroups with respect to Gender and Race.
Table 4: Table containing data statistics and black-box model details. The binary version of thedatasets are take from (Pawelczyk et al., 2021) whereas the non-binary version are taken from(Mothilal et al., 2020).
Table 5: Table providing qualitative examples for two users from the dataset. We show each usersstate vector, the features that user is willing to edit, the preference scores for those editable features,the recourses provided and the cost of the generated recourses. In the first example we see that userhighly prefers the feature capital loss and the recourse which suggests edit to that has the lowestcost for the user. Whereas, the recourse which makes changes to both Occupation and Capital Losshas the highest cost as its changing multiple features. For the second user, we see that the mostpreferred feature is Education-Num but the changes suggested in the recourse requires three steps7-8-9-10, hence the cost for that recourse is not the lowest but still relatively low. Whereas, therecourse suggesting smaller changes to Capital Loss which is the second most preferred feature hasthe lowest cost for the user.
Table 6: Table comparing different recourse methods across various cost and distance metrics onNon-Binary versions of the datasets (Section B.1.1).The numbers reported are averaged across 5different runs. Variance values have been as 89% of them were lower than 0.05, with the maximumbeing 0.86. FS@1: Fraction of users satisfied at k = 1. PAC: Population Average Cost. Cov:Population Coverage. For all the metrics higher is better except for PAC where lower is better.
