Table 1: Effect measures for (1) lesion-based experiments measuring importance via overall accuracydrops (Acc. Drop) and coherence via the class-wise range of accuracy drops (Class Range); and (2)Feature visualization-based experiments in networks measuring coherence via the optimization score(Vis Score) and the entropy of network outputs (Softmax H). Each row corresponds to a networkpaired with a partitioning method. Results are calculated as explained in Section 3.2. For accuracydrop, class-wise range and visualization score experiments, an effect measure > 1 corresponds tomore importance/coherence among true subclusters than random ones, while one of < 1 does forsoftmax entropy experiments. Entries where the effect measure is more than two standard errorsaway from 1 in the direction of modularity are bolded.
Table 2: Comparison for different cluster number values in CNN-VGG networks for lesion-basedexperiments. Results are shown for k ∈ {8, 12, 16}. Each Fisher-Bates p value which is significantunder the Benjamini Hochberg multiple correction at α = 0.05 is bold. An effect measure > 1corresponds to more importance/coherence among true subclusters than random ones. All above 1are bold.
Table 3: Comparison for different cluster values in CNN-VGG networks for feature visualization-based experiments. Tesults are shown for k ∈ 8, 12, 16. Each Fisher-Bates p value which is significantat α = 0.05 level under the Benjamini Hochberg multiple correction is bold. For vis score tests, aneffect measure > 1 corresponds to more coherence, and for softmax H tests, one of < 1 correspondsto more coherence. All effect measures on the size of 1 indicating more coherence are boldNetwork k	Partitioning	Coherence: Vis Score		Coherence: Softmax H			p Value	Effect Meas. High→Coh.	p Value	Effect Meas. Low→Coh.
Table 4: Results for lesion-based experiments in networks involving importance as measured throughoverall accuracy drops and coherence as measured by the class-wise range of accuracy drops. Eachrow corresponds to a network paired with a partitioning method. Results are calculated as explainedin Section 3.2. Each Fisher-Bates p value which is significant at an α = 0.05 level under theBenjamini Hochberg multiple correction is in bold. In this case, significance means p ≤ 0.025. Forboth accuracy drop and classwise range experiments, an effect measure > 1 corresponds to moreimportance/coherence among true subclusters than random ones. All such effect measures which arefurther than two standard errors above 1 are in bold.
Table 5: Results for feature visualization-based experiments in networks involving coherence asmeasured by the optimization score of feature visualizations and the entropy of network outputs.
