Table 1: Averaged node classification accuracy (%) ± std under targeted attack (Nettack) withdifferent perturbation ratio — We denote the evaluated dataset by its name with the number ofperturbations (e.g., Cora-0 means the clean Cora graph and Cora-1 denotes there is 1 adversarialedge perturbation per target node). We bold and underline the first and second highest accuracy,respectively. OOM means out of memory.
Table 2: Averaged node classification accuracy (%) ± std under non-targeted attack (Metattack) withdifferent perturbation ratio — We denote the evaluated dataset by its name with the perturbation ratio(e.g., Cora-0 means the clean Cora graph and Cora-10 denotes there are 10% adversarial edges). Webold and underline the first and second highest accuracy, respectively. OOM means out of memory.
Table 3: Averaged node classification accuracy (%) ± std under non-targeted attack (Metattack) withdifferent perturbation ratio — We denote the evaluated dataset by its name with the perturbationratio (e.g., Chameleon-0 means the clean Chameleon graph and Chameleon-10 denotes there are10% adversarial edges). We bold and underline the first and second highest accuracy, respectively.
Table 4: Averaged accuracy (%) ± std and run time under non-targeted attack (DICE) with 60%perturbation ratio — We bold the highest accuracy. OOM indicates out of memory.
Table 5: Averaged node classification accuracy (%) ± std under targeted attack (Nettack) Withdifferent perturbation ratio — We denote the evaluated dataset by its name With the number ofperturbations (e.g., Chameleon-0 means the clean Chameleon graph and Chameleon-1 denotes thereis 1 adversarial edge perturbation per target node). We bold and underline the first and secondhighest accuracy, respectively.
Table 6: Run time (secs) of each kernel in GARNET— We decompose the reduced-rank approxima-tion kernel into truncated SVD (TSVD) and approximate kNN graph construction (AKNN) steps.
Table 7: Summary of hyperparameters in GARNET— Apart from the notations r, k, and δ men-tioned in Section 3.1, We denote polynomial degree, learning rate, number of epochs, Weight_decay,dropout, and coefficient initialization in the adaptive filter learning kernel by P , lr, epochs, wd, dp,and c, respectively.
Table 8: Statistics of datasets used in our experiments.
Table 9: Averaged node classification accuracy (%) ± std under targeted attack (Nettack) withdifferent perturbation ratio — We denote the evaluated dataset by its name with the number ofperturbations (e.g., Cora-1 denotes there is 1 adversarial edge perturbation per target node).
