Table 1: Quantitative Results. a) Average Accuracy of Proto-Trex with different LMs on differentdatasets. Best (“•”) and runner-up (“◦”) are bold. b) Ablation study of Proto-Trex module choiceson Yelp dataset. c) Evaluation of i/Proto-Trex regarding faithfulness on MovieReview dataset. Meanvalues over 5 runs are reported. The confidence intervals can be found in Appendix Tab. 5Importance Query: I really like the good food and kind service here.
Table 2: Provided Explanations by Proto-Trex networks. Top-four explanations for the query (toprow) are provided for sentence-level networks. Colored boxes illustrate the advantage of pruningsentence explanations (interaction). Importance scores (left, bold) are calculated with cosine simi-larity and classification weight.
Table 3: Interactive learning: Different user interaction methods with accuracy on Yelp reviews. In-teraction changes a redundant prototype into a user-selected one incorporating more user knowledgewithout significantly impacting the accuracy.
Table 4: 1) Search space for hyperparameter grid search. 2-4) Hyperparameter setup for Proto-Trexmodels on the three different datasets.
Table 5: Extension of Tab. 1 with respective confidence intervals.
Table 6:	Impact of Projection on Proto-Trex networks.
Table 7:	Provided Explanations by Proto-Trex networks. Highlighted words mark matching subse-quences between query (top-row) and corresponding top three most similar prototypes (word-level).
Table 8:	Proto-Trex GPT-2 Prototypes. The prototypes are received with GPT-2 for the Yelp Open(a) and MovieReview (b) dataset. The prototypical subsequences provided by GPT-2 are highlightedin color.
Table 9:	Proto-Trex SBERT Prototypes. The prototypes are received with SBERT for the Yelp Open(a) and MovieReview (b) dataset.
Table 10:	Pruning Prototypes with iProto-Trex. It shows the prototypes from Tab. 9(a) after pruninghas been applied. Pruning reduces the sequences in length while preserving the sentiment. Theaccuracy remains the same (cf. Tab. 11). Prototypes 4 and 9 are not pruned as this would alter thesentiment too much.
Table 11: User Interaction with iProto-Trex. Each row shows a different interaction method withthe balanced accuracy on the test set conducted on Yelp Open dataset. The interaction methodsare able to remove the unwanted prototype while incorporating more knowledge and hence moreinterpretability along with a higher accuracy.
Table 12: Top-3 Explanations for Query in the Introduction (Fig. 1). The first three rows depictexplanations with sentence-level Proto-Trex with the SBERT transformer, while the last three showthe top three explanations iProto-Trex. On the left side, one can see the importance scores for theclassification.
