Table 1: Results on Imagenet-Val. We report coverage and size of the optimal, randomized fixed sets, naive,APS, and RAPS sets for nine different Imagenet classifiers. The median-of-means for each column is reportedover 100 different trials. See Section 3.1 for full details.
Table 2: Results on Imagenet-V2. We report coverage and size of the optimal, randomized fixed sets, naive,APS, and RAPS sets for nine different Imagenet classifiers. The median-of-means for each column is reportedover 100 different trials at the 10% level. See Section 3.2 for full details.
Table 3: Set sizes of RAPS with parameters kreg and λ, a ResNet-152, and coverage level 90%.
Table 4: Coverage conditional on set size. We report average coverage of images stratified by the size of theset output by RAPS using a ResNet-152 for varying λ. The marginal coverage rate is 90%.
Table 5: Results on Imagenet-Val. We report coverage and size of the optimal, randomized fixed sets, naive,APS, and RAPS sets for nine different Imagenet classifiers. The median-of-means for each column is reportedover 100 different trials. See Section 3.1 for full details.
Table 6: Results on Imagenet-V2. We report coverage and size of the optimal, randomized fixed sets, naive,APS, and RAPS sets for nine different Imagenet classifiers. The median-of-means for each column is reportedover 100 different trials at the 5% level. See Section 3.2 for full details.
Table 7: Coverage and size conditional on difficulty. We report coverage and size of RAPS sets using ResNet-152 with kreg = 5 and varying λ (recall that λ = 0 is the APS procedure). The desired coverage level is 90%.
Table 8: Adaptiveness results after automatically tuning λ. We report the median size-stratified coverageviolations of APS and RAPS over 10 trials. See Appendix E.2 for experimental details.
Table 9: Results on Imagenet-Val. We report coverage and size of the optimal, randomized fixed sets, naive, APS, RAPS , and the LAC sets for nine different Imagenet classifiers.
Table 10: Coverage and size conditional on difficulty. We report coverage and size of the LAC sets forResNet-152.
Table 11: Adaptiveness results after automatically tuning λ. We report the median SSCV of APS RAPSand LAC over 10 trials. See Appendix E.2 for experimental details.
