Table 1: Trained without normalizing inputs, mean/s.d. from 5 experiments reported. Our Cayleylayer outperforms other methods in both test and `2 certifiable robust accuracy.
Table 2: Empirical adversarial robustness for residual networks, mean and standard deviation forResNet9 from 3 experiments. Cayley layers perform competitively on clean and robust accuracy.
Table 3: Trained with normalizing inputs, mean and standard deviation from 5 experiments reported.
Table 4: Here we multiplied the input channels and output channels of each layer of KWLarge bywidth; we report on changes in accuracy and average runtime per epoch (100 epochs). Width 1 wason a Nvidia RTX 2080 Ti, while 2, 3, 6, and 8 were on a Nvidia Quadro RTX 8000. In this case,we were unable to scale BCOP to width 8 due to time and memory constraints. Generally, the widernetworks may need more epochs to converge.
Table 5: Our Cayley layer was not as fast for residual networks, possibly because they have convo-lutions with more channels and also larger spatial dimension, which is a multiplicative factor in ourruntime analysis. This is especially true for the WideResNet. For plain conv, we replaced the Cayleyconvolutional layer with a plain circular convolution, leaving the Cayley fully-connected layers. Forboth plain, we also used plain fully-connected layers.
Table 6: Additional baseline for KWLargetrained for provable robustness. Mean ands.d. over 5 trials.
Table 7: Additional baselines for ResNet9 trainedfor empirical adversarial robustness. Mean ands.d. over 3 trials.
Table 8: For BCOP, RKO and OSSN, we report the best bound over all trials from the experimentsin the repository containing BCOP’s implementation (Li et al., 2019). We ran one trial of theWasserstein GAN experiment, replacing the BCOP and Bjorck layers with our Cayley convolutionaland linear layers, and achieved a significantly tighter bound. We only report on experiments usingthe GroupSort (MaxMin) activation (Anil et al., 2019) and on the STL-10 dataset.
