Figure 1: Left: 3 planes in general position and the preimage (red) of the output (black dot) e2 ande3 components of dual basis used to generate preimage. Right: Polyhedral cone of 3 planes froma circulant layer transformation matrix. (two different views) The nesting property of the cone willrefer to it’s ability to “grip” the coordinate axis of the input space.
Figure 2: Illustration of how data in 2d input space (x1, x2) contracts by successive layers in multilayer 2 node networks with circulant transformations. Left: Transformation (a, b) = (1, 0) . Onlythe bias differs between layers. Alternating red and blue frames show successive layers remapped tothe input space. Right: Arbitrary circulant transformations. Note how the nesting property insuresa good variation in the generated manifolds. When nesting becomes less pronounced for highervalues of input the variation of the manifolds diminishes.
Figure 3: Illustration of how data maps between intersection subspaces in two successive layersof 3 node networks with circulant transformations Left: Identity transformation and bias only. Anelement in the input space maps according to it’s cell location determined by the sign relative tothe output hyperplanes. The figure illustrates how two different cells, dark grey and light greyare mapped to red 2d plane and red 1d line in the output layer. Note that both 3d volume, 2dfaces and 1d edges maps to the same output intersection subspace. This means that dimension ofsubspace location for the element is non increasing which implies that data gets contracted. Thisis a consequence of the nesting properties of the output and input polyhedral cones. Right Thetransformation is now such that the angle of the cone is increased. The planes of the output layernow intersects the coordinate axis of the input space. Beyond the intersections the non increasingcontraction property ceases. The dark gray areas indicate preimages of points located on the output1-d coordinate axis. Note how they are decreases in size between the left and right examples.
Figure 4: Piecewise planar manifold in 3d input space that maps to affine manifold (blue triangle)at the final convolutional layer in a 3-node 3-layer network with circulant transformations. Alldata is remapped to the input space. Left: Red patches are mapped to 0 dimensional red points atthe three output coordinate axis Blue patches are mapped to 1d lines connecting the points. (darkred is outside light red is inside of the manifold Right: Patches that are generated by selectivecomponents of the dual basis at each layer. The positive span generated by selective components ofthe dual basis emanating from the red output points on the triangle as well as from each intersectionwith coordinate lines in early layers, intersects with the arrangement of hyperplanes representingthe preceding layer. The 1-d intersections are then used as seed points for new spans that intersectnext preceding layer etc. The 2d intersections together with selective edges from the spans generatelinking patches that ensures the continuity of the input manifold.
