Figure 1: True data samples with corresponding optimal maps (black arrows) obtained with Discrete-OT. (a) 1024 data samples of X (magenta) and Y (green) in 4-Gaussians, Checkerboard, 2-Spirals.
Figure 2: Mappings learned in three synthetic datasets by Barycentric-OT (Seguy et al., 2018),WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017), WGAN-LP (Petzka et al., 2018) and our proposed W2GAN. Thegenerator maps (gray arrows) samples from X (magenta) to samples G(X) (red) such that it matchesdistribution of Y (green). W2GAN and WGAN-LP can successfully recover optimal map betweenX and Y in all three datasets. The generator is initialized as identity before training, thus the analysisimplies it is learning a map between X and Y .
Figure 3: In W2GAN, the discriminator approximates the Monge map locally. (a) Gradient directionprovided by φ to the generator. φ takes the magenta distribution as input. The arrows displayedcorrespond to the approximation of T using the discriminator (b) Heat-map of values of φ over R2 .
Figure 4: Evolution of the generator (top row) and the gradient it receives from φ (bottom row)through training. The generator starts as an identity function and is trained to recover the greendistribution. We can track its evolution during training with gray arrows. The gradient it receivesfrom φ is represented by black arrows from the generated distribution G(X) (magenta) toward thedirection given by the discriminator,s signal G(X) - Vφ(G(X)). The generator is following theW2-geodesic.
Figure 5: Comparing learned maps by W2GAN model and Barycentric-OT (Seguy et al., 2018)on the task of mapping 28 × 28 MV-Gaussian to MNIST. (a) Samples from MV-Gaussian withmean and covariance estimated from MNIST. (b) Corresponding samples from Barycentric-OT. (c)Corresponding samples from our W2GAN model.
Figure 6: The Monge problem. (a) A discrete example of the Monge problem (1) for distributions inR2. The μ distribution consists in three equally weighted diracs in xι, x2 and x3, while the V one isrepresented by y1 , y2 and y3 in the same way. Black arrows denote the actual optimal transport mapT. The green arrows together also define a map from μ onto V, but it is not optimal. (b) A continuousexample of the Monge problem (1). μ and V are uniform distributions on the blue and green ellipsoidsrespectively. The optimal transport map T is defined for any point in the support of μ, and we seehow it transports some points onto V’s support with the arrows.
Figure 7: The time evolving generated distribution minimizing its Wasserstein distance with thetrue distribution X . The latent space is fixed and we denote it as Z . Green arrows give the shapeof the optimal transport map T between the initial distribution G(0, Z) and the true distribution X.
