Figure 1: DR tests: ?) full dataset, 2.1.a) a random %10 subset, 2.1.b) even digits only. The dottedline between the centers of the clusters ‘0’ and ‘6’ is drawn for comparing the distance between thecluster centers before and after removing the subsets from the dataset. The (AUC, NN-Accuracy)values are shown on the bottom of each figure. Best viewed in color.
Figure 1: (continued) DR tests: ?) full dataset, 2.2) outlier, 2.3) multiple scales. The (AUC, NN-Accuracy) values are shown on the bottom of each figure. Best viewed in color.
Figure 2: (left) Loss transformation ` → logt(1+`) and (right) similarity function u → expt0 (-u2)for different values of t and t0 , respectively.
Figure 3: Effect of changing t and t0 parameters: top) results using fixed log-transformation (t =1)and different values of t0 for similarity function. Notice that having heavier-tail provides moreseparability but cannot fix the clutter introduced by the unsatisfied triplets by itself, bottom) resultsusing different values of t (i.e. logt-loss transformation) with t0 = 2 (i.e. Student t for similarities)fixed. Note that having logt-transformation is crucial to obtain nice visualizations. Value of t =0corresponds to no transformation (Equation (1)), t = 1 recovers the log-transformation, t =2is usedin our experiments. The box indicate the default choice of parameters by our algorithm.
Figure 4: Results of different methods: i) Epileptic Seizure Recognition, ii) Tabula Muris, iii)Fashion MNIST dataset, iv) TV News: commercial (yellow), non-commercial (blue), v) 380k+ lyrics,vi) DBLP dataset: collaboration network of authors. Best viewed in colors.
Figure 5: DR tests: ?) full dataset, 2.1.a) a random %10 subset, 2.1.b) even digits only. The dottedline between the centers of the clusters ‘0’ and ‘6’ is drawn for comparing the distance between thecluster centers before and after removing the subsets from the dataset. The (AUC, NN-Accuracy)values are shown on the bottom of each figure. Best viewed in color.
Figure 5: (continued) DR tests: ?) full dataset, 2.2) outlier, 2.3) multiple scales. The (AUC, NN-Accuracy) values are shown on the bottom of each figure. Best viewed in color.
Figure 6: The effect of changing the number of nearest neighbors m using unweighted triplets (toprow) and weighted triplets (bottom row). The values (m, m0 ,s) are denoted on top of each figure.
Figure 7: The effect of changing the number of distant points m0 using unweighted triplets (toprow) and weighted triplets (bottom row). The values (m, m0 ,s) are denoted on top of each figure.
Figure 8: The effect of changing the number of random triplets per point s using unweighted triplets(top row) and weighted triplets (bottom row). The values (m, m0 ,s) are denoted on top of eachfigure. Note that increasing s improves the global structure, obtained using the weighted triplets. Theunweighted triplets do not benefit from randomly generated triplets.
Figure 9: Results of different method on the Sphere dataset (top) and Swissroll dataset (bottom). Thevisualization of the Sphere dataset by TriMap corresponds to stretching the sphere along the diagonaland spreading the points on 2-D. Note that the visualization by TriMap preserves the continuity ofthe underlying manifold more than t-SNE and LargeVis. On Swissroll dataset, TriMap preserves theglobal structure, e.g. relative distances between the end-points of the underlying manifold, betterthan the other methods.
Figure 10: Results of different method on the ISOMAP Faces dataset. PHATE, PCA, and TriMapuncover the curvature on two end-points of the underlying manifold where the sets of darker imageshaving different poses are located. These darker images (having different poses) are intuitively closerto each other in the high-dimensional space than their brighter counterparts.
