Figure 1: Pixel empirical CDF of training data as reference (green) and other datasets(red)In addition, plots of the distribution of statistical moments of the spectral centroid in 2 suggeststhat the fake images are more noisy than the real images. Consider for example images produced byrandomly sampling a Bernoulli distribution with parameter estimated from the training data. Theseimages have pixel values of 0 or 1 that are equally distributed 3 over the image. Well, an image thathas pixels values distributed in such a manner will have a distribution of mean spectral centroid witha mode at the center row of the image. This and the similarity between the distribution of mean3This spatial distribution is independent of the parameter of the Bernoulli distribution.
Figure 2: Distribution of moments of spectral centroids computed on each image.
Figure 3: Histogram of pixel values for each dataset. First row shows values within [0, 1] and 100bins. Second row shows values within [0.11, and 0.88] and 100 bins.
Figure 4:	Fake MNIST samples and pixel distribution from generators trained with DCGAN, BatchNorm and linear or scaled tanh activation functions.
Figure 5:	Fake MNIST samples and pixel distribution from generators trained on binarized real datawith DCGAN and WGAN-GP, Batch Norm and linear activation functions.
Figure 6:	CIFAR10 pixel distribution and test statisticsFigure 7: Distribution of pixel intensities from real and fake samples. The pixel distribution computedover fake samples is continuous and smoothly approximates the mode at 1.0normally written for 4 or 5 voices, that follow a set of specifications or rules5. For example, a globalspecification could assert that only a set of durations are valid; a local specification could assert thatonly certain transitions between states (notes) are valid depending on the current harmony.
Figure 7: Distribution of pixel intensities from real and fake samples. The pixel distribution computedover fake samples is continuous and smoothly approximates the mode at 1.0normally written for 4 or 5 voices, that follow a set of specifications or rules5. For example, a globalspecification could assert that only a set of durations are valid; a local specification could assert thatonly certain transitions between states (notes) are valid depending on the current harmony.
Figure 8: Bach Chorales intensity distributionbach_train bach_test bach_iwgan	bach_bernoulliNumberofViolations P	429	5029	58284Table 2: Number of specification violations with training data as reference.
Figure 9: Bach Chorales distribution of note durations and statisticstraintestiwganbernoulliKS Two Sample Test		JSDStatistic	P-Value	0.0	1.0	0.00.09375	0.929	0.0020.21875	0.080	0.0840.93750	0.0	0.604(b) Test statistics4.4 SpeechWithin the speech domain, we investigate real and fake samples from Mel-Spectrograms. We dividethe NIST 2004 dataset into training and test set, generate samples with the GAN framework and usea random baseline sampled from a Exponential distribution with parameters chosen using heuristics.
Figure 10:	Empirical CDF and statistical tests of speech intensityTable 10b shows a significant difference between the KS-Statistic of test samples and fake sampleswith respect to the training data. However, an adversary can manipulate the fake samples to consider-ably decrease this difference and still keep the high similarity in features harder to simulate such asmoments of spectral centroid or slope.
Figure 11:	Moments of spectral centroid (left) and slope(right)5 ConclusionsIn this paper we investigated numerical properties of samples produced with adversarial methods,specially Generative Adversarial Networks. We showed that fake samples have properties thatare barely noticed with visual inspection of samples, namely the fact that fake samples smoothlyapproximate the dominating modes of the distribution due to stochastic gradient descent and therequirements of differentiability. We analysed statistical measures of divergence between real dataand other data and the results showed that even in simple cases, e.g. distribution of pixel intensities,the divergence between training data and fake data is large with respect to test data. Finally, we minedspecifications from real data and showed that, unlike test data, the fake data considerably violates thespecifications of the real data.
Figure 12: Spectral centroids on digits and Mel-Spectrograms(a) MNIST samples and slopes	(b) Mel-Spectrograms and slopesFigure 13: Spectral slopes on digits and Mel-SpectrogramsAppendix B	MNIST Images10Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019Appendix C	Bach Choral Imagesbach-trainFigure 15: Samples drawn from Bach Chorales train, test, IWGAN, and Bernoulli respectively.
Figure 13: Spectral slopes on digits and Mel-SpectrogramsAppendix B	MNIST Images10Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019Appendix C	Bach Choral Imagesbach-trainFigure 15: Samples drawn from Bach Chorales train, test, IWGAN, and Bernoulli respectively.
Figure 15: Samples drawn from Bach Chorales train, test, IWGAN, and Bernoulli respectively.
Figure 16: Samples drawn from NIST2004 train, test, IWGAN, and exponential respectively.
