Figure 1: Schematic diagram of our Mol-CycleGAN. X and Y are the sets of molecules with se-lected values of the molecular property (e.g. active/inactive or with high/low values of logP). G andF are the generators. DX and DY are the discriminators.
Figure 2: Distributions of the number of aromatic rings in X, GpX q, Y , and FpY q. Identity map-pings are not included in the figures.
Figure 4: The most similar molecules with changed number of aromatic rings. In the top row weshow the starting molecules, whereas in the bottom row we show the generated molecules. Belowwe provide the Tanimoto similarities between the molecules.
Figure 3: Density plots of Tanimoto similarities between molecules from Y (and X) and theircorresponding molecules from FpY q (and GpXq). Similarities between molecules from Y (and X)and random molecules from ZINC-250K are included for comparison. Identity mappings are notincluded. The distributions of similarities related to transformations given by G and F show thesame trend.
Figure 5: Molecules with the highest improvement of the penalized IogP for δ20.6. In the toprow we show the starting molecules, whereas in the bottom row we show the generated molecules.
Figure 6: Results of iterative procedure of the unconstrained optimization. (a) Distribution of penal-ized logP in the starting set and after K “ 1, 5, 10, 30 iterations. (b) Distribution of the Tanimotosimilarity between the starting molecules X and random molecules from ZINC-250K, as well asthose generated after K “ 1, 2, 5, 10 iterations. (c) Plot of the mean value, quantiles (75th and90th), and the maximum value of penalized logP as a function of the number of optimization itera-tions.
Figure 7: Number of aromatic rings in ZINC-250K and in the sets used in the experiment on aromaticrings (Section 4.1)For the molecule optimization tasks we plot the distribution of the property being optimized (penal-ized logP) in Figs. 8 (constrained optimization) and 9 (unconstrained optimization).
Figure 8: Distribution of penalized logP in ZINC-250K and in the sets used in the task of constrainedmolecule optimization (Section 4.2). Note that the sets X train and Y train are non-overlapping (theyare a random sample from ZINC-250K split by the median). X test is the set of 800 molecules fromZINC-250K with the lowest values of penalized logP.
Figure 9: Distribution of penalized logP in ZINC-250K and in the sets used in the task of uncon-strained molecule optimization (Section 4.3). Note that the set X train is a random sample fromZINC-250K, and hence the same distribution is observed for the two sets.
Figure 10: Evolution of a selected exemplary molecule during constrained optimization. We onlyinclude the steps along the path where a change in the molecule is introduced. We show penalizedlogP below the molecules.
Figure 11: Evolution of a selected exemplary molecule during constrained optimization. We onlyinclude the steps along the path where a change in the molecule is introduced. We show penalizedlogP below the molecules.
Figure 12: Evolution of a selected exemplary molecule during constrained optimization. We onlyinclude the steps along the path where a change in the molecule is introduced. We show penalizedlogP below the molecules.
Figure 13: Evolution of a selected molecule during consecutive iterations of unconstrained opti-mization. We show penalized logP below the molecules.
Figure 14: Evolution of a selected molecule during consecutive iterations of unconstrained opti-mization. We show penalized logP below the molecules.
Figure 15: Molecules with the highest penalized logP in the set being optimized for iterations 1-24for unconstrained molecule optimization. We show penalized logP below the molecules.
