Figure 1: microGAN framework assuming a posi-tive diversity parameter α. Each discriminator Dkis assigned a different microbatch xGD , where itdiscriminates between samples coming from in-side its microbatch and samples coming from themicrobatches assigned to the rest of the discrimi-nators (xG\xGD ) together the real samples xrD .
Figure 2: Toy experiment using static α values. Realdata is presented in red while generated data is in blue.
Figure 3: Analysis of using different α functionson the toy dataset. The generated samples areshown in (a). The evolution of α on each functionis presented in (b).
Figure 4: Intra FID as α progresses. Higher values represent higher variety in the generated set.
Figure 5: Cumulative Intra FID using a different number of discriminators and α functions on thedifferent datasets. Higher values correlate to higher variety in the produced samples across time.
Figure 6: Generated samples from 1K, 2K, 5K and 50K iteration with the respective Intra FID.
Figure 7: CIFAR-10, STL-10, andImageNet results.
Figure 8: Analysis of self-learning αsigm with different initial values of β. The generated samplesin (a) show that using lower βsigm values lead the model to mode collapse, since only low α valuesare used throughout the whole training. On the other hand, using higher values, e.g., βsigm = 0.0,leads to a steeper increase of α values, inducing the model to only generate varied, but not realistic,samples. We empirically found that using -2.0 ≤ βsigm ≤ -1.8 led to diverse plus realistic lookingsamples from early iterations due to the mild, yet meaningful, increase ofα throughout training. Theevolution of α's values are presented in (b).
Figure 9: Method comparisons on the toy dataset.
Figure 10: CIFAR-10 extended results using K = 2 and αsigm .
Figure 11: CIFAR-10 extended results using K = 2 and αsoft .
Figure 12: CIFAR-10 extended results using K = 2 and αtanh .
Figure 13: STL-10 extended results using K = 2 and αsigm.
Figure 14: STL-10 extended results using K = 2 and αsoft.
Figure 15: STL-10 extended results using K = 2 and αtanh .
Figure 16: ImageNet extended results using K = 2 and αsigm .
Figure 17: ImageNet extended results using K = 2 and αsigm .
Figure 18: ImageNet extended results using K = 2 and αsigm .
