Figure 1: Visualization of progressive augmentation. With each extra augmentation level (L →L + 1) the dimensionality of the discriminator input space is increased and the discrimination taskgradually becomes harder. This strategy prevents the discriminator from easily finding a decisionboundary between two classes and thus leads to meaningful gradients for the generator updates.
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed PA-GANs training. With each level of progressive augmenta-tion L the dimensionality of s is enlarged from 1 to N, s = {s1, s2, . . . , sN}. The task difficulty ofthe discriminator, checksum computation of (x, s), increases as the length of s grows.
Figure 3: Mean FID values attained over iterations withdifferent NS GAN variants across five runs on CIFAR10. Themaximal number of achieved PA levels is 7.
Figure A1: Mean FID values attained over iterations across five independent runs with differentNS GAN variants on CELEBA-HQ (128 × 128), using the SN-DCGAN architecture. The maximalnumber of achieved augmentation levels is 10.
Figure A2: Inception scores (IS) attained over iterationswith different NS GAN variants averaged across five inde-pendent runs on CIFAR10.
Figure A3: KID values attained over iterations with dif-ferent NS GAN variants averaged across five independentruns on CIFAR10.
Figure A4: FID attainedprogression starting levelsdent runs on CIFAR10.
Figure A5: IS attained over iterations with different pro-gression starting levels averaged across five independentruns on CIFAR10.
Figure A6: KID values attained over iterations with dif-ferent progression starting levels averaged across five in-dependent runs on CIFAR10.
Figure A7: Synthetic images generated by PAL=2 - NS GAN - GP with the FID 22.5 on CIFAR10.
Figure A8: FID values with InfoGAN on CELEBA, the results are attained after 40 epochs (about100k iterations). We remove outliers that are outside 4 standard deviation. In all cases, the numberof outliers is less than 5% among 50 independent runs. The maximal number of achieved PA levelsis 7.
Figure A9: FID mean and standard deviation values across 50 independent runs with InfoGAN onCELEBA, dependent on the number of removed outliers.
