Figure 1: Illustrative 1-d cross-correlation motivatingthe discrete wavelet reconstruction kernel for relativetime dependencies.
Figure 2: Wavelet reconstruction network architecture(H TXeEl) 8npeDis」eeu= / -OOd eɔuued07 + 0 T H-山)OOnPeH_lNLet hej (t; ti , τd) be a piecewise-constant kernel function for event e on absolute time intervals τdwith index set J = {1, 2}, where j = 1 indicates a time kernel andj = 2 indicate a time-value kernel.
Figure 3:	Left: three absolute time hazards (green, blue, and purple) for one trajectory With different stepssizes and censor times. Right: forecasting tasks. The vertical distance from the line t0 = t is censor distance c.
Figure 4:	Examples: acute coronary syndrome-angina (left), ACS (middle); diabetes simulation (right).
Figure 5: Left: hazards and hemoglobin A1c events for A1C* simulation. Right: hazards and hemoglobin A1cevents for five random, test set patients in real cohort.
Figure 6: Left: ketoacidosis, retinopathy, or polyneuropathy diagnoses and rate predictions for thirty random testset patients. Right: combined outcome (KNR) negative log likelihood as a function of censor distance (in years).
Figure 7: Best viewed in color. Left: negative log likelihood as a function of forecast censoring distancec for multi-forecasts. The permute and pool layer expresses greater expressivity to model the hazard thanWRN. Middle left: coefficient profile as a function of forecast censoring distance c for WRN. The reductionlayer comprises additions and maximums of 1-d and row-indexed 2-d reconstructions. Middle right: waveletreconstruction of troponin contribution to ACS hazard. A preceding troponin above 0.01 indicates increasedrate of ACS occurrence within the next hour. Right: WRN-PPL reconstruction image for multi-forecasting atc= {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}.
Figure 8: Hemoglobin A1c hazard prediction with nowcastingPredicted hazard, by hazard groupFigure 9: Hemoglobin A1c calibration plot for multi-forecasting, with c = {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}. The legenddenotes the number of years prior the time at prediction is compared to the forecast time. Dotted line denote2-fold miscalibration.
Figure 9: Hemoglobin A1c calibration plot for multi-forecasting, with c = {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}. The legenddenotes the number of years prior the time at prediction is compared to the forecast time. Dotted line denote2-fold miscalibration.
Figure 10: Loss by epoch curves for real data, target: {ketoacidosis, polyneuropathy, retinopathy} used for earlystopping (left) and target: hemoglobin A1c (right).
