Figure 1: A Task. The network is presented an MNIST or CIFAR-10 image amidst noisy images,and has to report its label at a later time, as requested by a separate input (0, 1 to the right of images).
Figure 2: Retrieval accuracy when increasing the delay between stimulus and response trigger be-yond Tmax = 20 (left) and for increasing noise standard deviation beyond σn (right) For MNISTand CIFAR-10 (inset). Despite similar performance initially, the ability to generalize for greaterdelays and greater noises than trained for varies with protocol. On the MNIST dataset, DeCu wassuperior in both LSTM and GRU architectures compared to VoCu, while with CIFAR-10, results onLSTM were qualitatively similar to the results on MNIST. However, with the GRU architecture onthe CIFAR-10 dataset, VoCu’s performance was preferable to Decu’s.
Figure 3: Hidden state projected on leading principal components in GRU - RNN on MNIST. Delaysof ∆t = 20 and 103 time-steps are depicted with latter shown for different input noise strength.
Figure 4: We measured the speed of slow points, and computed the extrapolation accuracy of theassociated class for long delays. In all datasets, unit-types and training methods, slower speedscorrelate with increased accuracy. Errorbars in the black curves denoted standard error of the mean.
Figure 5: A,B Speeds of each slow-point through training 2obtained by iteratively tracking themback in training time. The specific schedule of each curriculum is marked on the time axis. VoCushows sharp jumps in the speed of all points for each class introduction, in contrast to DeCu whichexhibits a gradual slowing down along the whole course of training. C A bifurcation diagram forVoCu, obtain from short backtracking every class proximal to its appearance. The change in readoutsuggests which slow point gave rise to the new point (e.g., 8 from 5 at time 78; 7 from 3 or 4 attime 62). D Under twice the nominal noise the accuracies of each individual class for the sameVoCu realization when class ’7’ was introduced. As a result, all previously existing classes show adegradation in accuracy, however, the classes from which class ’7’ emerged from (classes ’3’ and’4’) exhibited a stronger decline. E Verifying the statistical significance of the result in (D). For eachbifurcation event, we comparing the accuracy drop of classes that gave rise to the new class, withthe drop for the remaining classes. The histogram is from all events in three VoCu realizations, andshows that indeed accuracy of spawning classes decreases more following a bifurcation.
