Figure 1: At initialization the maximumeigenvalue of the Fisher information ma-trix GG correlates highly with the maximumsingular value of the Jacobian Jxx0L . Whilethe dependence is not perfectly quadratic aspredicted, the deviation can be understood interms of the bound implied by the Gershgorintheorem for block matrices - the bound be-comes tight in the limit of q * → ∞. The net-works not used in the experiments were ran-domly initialized with χ = 1 and q * vary-ing uniformly on a logarithmical grid between9 × 10-4 and 0.5.
Figure 2: Manifold constrained networks are insensitive to the choice of q* : Train loss and testaccuracy for Euclidean, Stiefel and Oblique networks with two different values ofq*. The manifoldconstrained networks minimize the training loss at approximately the same rate, being faster thanboth Euclidean networks. Despite this, there is little difference between the test accuracy of theStiefel and Oblique networks and the Euclidean networks initialized with q* = 9 × 10-4. Notably,the latter attains a marginally higher test set accuracy towards the end of training.
Figure 3: The maximum singular value of the Jacobian smax(Jxx0L ) is predictive of the maxi-mum eigenvalue of the Fisher information matrix λmaχ (G) during training. The dashed coloredlines represent λmaχ(G), while the continuous colored lines represent Smax(JxL). The correlationcaptures particularly well the initial increase in the λmax(G) during the first few epochs. Moreover,for Stiefel and Oblique networks the correlation is stronger.
Figure 4: For manifold constrained net-works, gradient smoothness is not predic-tive of optimization rate. Euclidean net-works with a low initial λmaχ(GG) rapidlybecome less smooth, whereas Euclidean net-works with a larger λmaχ(GG) remain rela-tively smoother. Notably, the Euclidean net-Work with q* = 1/64 has &most an order ofmagnitude smaller λmaχ(G) than the StiefeIand Oblique networks, but reduces trainingloss at a slower rate.
Figure 5: Non-Gaussian projection of the pre-activations for random networks q* = 1/64 andevaluated on CIFAR-10. The projection was obtained using the algorithm in (Blanchard et al.,2006). The rightmost panel shows an overlay of the pre-activations compared to the most non-Gaussian projection of a set of 400 dimensional Gaussian random variables with variance matchedto the real data.
