Figure 1: Examples where FID gives inconsistent results with human judgements (a < b < c) onCelebA (Liu et al., 2015). The ImageNet inception model fails to encode fine-grained features onfaces. a) Random noise uniformly distributed in [-33,33] was applied on each pixel. b) Each imagewas divided into 8x8=64 regions and seven of them were sheltered by a pixel sampled from the face.
Figure 2: Examples where FID gives inconsistent results with human judgements on MNIST. Dueto the over-simplified Gaussian assumption, FID can be hacked by mode collapse. a) Samplesgenerated by a GAN model. b) Handmade images via axis permutation and FGSM (Goodfellowet al., 2014b). We use the domain-specific representation of VAE for embedding images. (See Table7)5.2.1	User StudyEvaluating the evaluation metrics is a non-trivial task, as the best criterion is the consistency withhuman judgements. Therefore, we performed user study to compare our proposed method withthe existing ones including Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016), Mode Score (Che et al., 2017)and FID (Heusel et al., 2017). Our setting is consistent with (Im et al., 2018). 15 volunteers werefirst trained to tell generated samples from the groundtruth in the dataset. Then, paired image setswere randomly sampled and volunteers were asked to tell the better sets. Finally, we counted pairswhere the metric agreed the voted results by the volunteers. We conducted experiments on MNISTwith two settings for the experiments: ‘easy’ and ‘hard’. The ‘easy’ setting is where random pairsare sampled from the intermediate results of GAN training, while the ‘hard’ setting is where onlyrandom pairs with the difference of FID of two sampled sets within a threshold are included. Table4 shows the results. It is worth noting that in hard cases, the results of Inception Score (Salimanset al., 2016) are relatively meaningless (50%), which makes it hard to be applied as guidance forimproving the quality of generated images by GANs. In both ‘easy’ and ‘hard’ settings, our methodgets consistent gain compared to baseline approaches.
