Figure 1: 2d histrogram of samplesfrom the MH algorithm with differ-ent proposals. From left to right pro-posals are learned by: variational in-ference, the acceptance rate maxi-mization, the acceptance rate lowerbound maximization.
Figure 2: Negative log-likelihood (left) and accuracy (right) on test set of MNIST dataset for varia-tional inference (blue lines) and the optimization of the acceptance rate lower bound (orange lines).
Figure 3: Test negative log-likelihood for two approximations of the predictive distribution based onsamples: from proposal distribution nllq and after MH correction nllMH . Left figure correspondsto the optimization of the acceptance rate lower bound, right figure corresponds to the variationalinference.
Figure 4: Samples from the learned independent proposal obtained via optimization: of acceptancerate (4(a), 4(b)) and its lower bound (4(c), 4(d)). In Fig. 4(b), 4(d) we show raw samples fromthe learned proposal. In Fig. 4(a), 4(c) we show the samples after applying the independent MHcorrection to the samples, using the learned discriminator for density ratio estimation.
Figure 5: SampleS from the chainobtained via the MH algorithm withthe learned propoSal and the learneddiScriminator for denSity ratio eSti-mation. Fig. 5(a) correSpondS to thedirect optimization of the acceptancerate. Fig. 5(b) — to optimization ofthe lower bound on acceptance rate.
Figure 6: Samples from the pro-posal distribution and conditionedon the digit in the red box. The pro-posal was optimized according to thelower bound on the acceptance rate.
Figure 7: In this figure we show schematic view of approximation of of target distribution withuniform distribution. Red bounding box is made bigger for better comprehension.
Figure 8: Level-plots in parameter space for the toy problem. Left: level-plot for the acceptance rateof the MH algorithm. Right: level-plot for the lower bound of the acceptance rate.
Figure 9: plots for the acceptance rate and the acceptance rate lower bound evaluated at everyiteration during the optimization of the acceptance rate lower bound. Correlation coefficient isevaluated between the logarithm of the acceptance rate and the acceptance rate lower bound.
Figure 10: levelplots of learned proposal densities. For each distribution from left to right proposalsare learned by: variational inference, the acceptance rate maximization, the acceptance rate lowerbound maximization.
Figure 11: 2d histrograms of samples from the MH algorithm with different proposals. For eachdistribution from left to right proposals are learned by: variational inference, the acceptance ratemaximization, the acceptance rate lower bound maximization.
Figure 12: Samples from the chain initialized with noise. To obtain samples we use the MH algo-rithm with the learned proposal and the learned discriminator for density ratio estimation. In Fig.
Figure 13: Samples from the chain after 10000 accepted samples. To obtain samples we use theMH algorithm with the learned proposal and the learned discriminator for density ratio estimation.
