Figure 1: The three components of our approach: 1) smooth estimates of a matrix with missingentries at multiple scales via co-clustering, 2) a multi-scale metric using the smooth estimates acrossall scales, yielding an affinity kernel between rows/columns, and 3) nonlinear embeddings of therows and columns. The multiscale metric between two columns (red and orange) is a weightedEuclidean distance between those columns at multiple scales, given by solving the co-clustering forincreasing values of the cost parameters γr and γc .
Figure 2: Comparing row and column embeddings of NLPCA, FRPCAG, DM, Ours, for threedatasets with 50% missing entries. For each dataset, top / bottom row is embedding of rows /columns of X. For the lung500 dataset, the color of the clusters are as follows: yellow - normalsubjects, dark blue - carcinoid, cyan - colon , red - small cell carcinoma.
Figure 3: Comparing k-means clustering applied to embedding of data for increasing percentagesof missing values for our multiscale approach (blue), diffusion maps of missing data matrix (red),NLPCA (yellow) and FRPCAG for two different cost parameter settings (green and purple). Weevaluate using the adjusted Rand Index (ARI) compared to the ground-truth labels of (left) the 4cancer types for the lung500 dataset, and (right) 3 Gaussian clusters of the linkage2 dataset.
Figure 4: Majorization of the Ω function (black) given in (3) by its first-order Taylor approximationat 1 (blue).
Figure 5: Points in 3D used to generate the Euclidean distance matrix X in the linkage dataset.
Figure 6: linkage dataset: (Left) Complete matrix X. (Right) Matrix whose rows and columns andcolumns have been permuted and 50% of the values have been removed.
Figure 7: linkage dataset: Filled-in matrices X at multiple scales: X ,X ,X . Rowsand columns have been reordered based on the manifold embedding following (Ankenman, 2014).
Figure 8: Points in 3D used to generate the Euclidean distance X in the linkage2 dataset. Rowscorrespond to the three 3D Gaussians, columns to the 2D surface. Points are colored correspondingto the embedding of rows and columns in Figure 217Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019Figure 9: lmkage2 dataset: (Left) Complete matrix X. (Right) Matrix whose rows and columns andcolumns have been permuted and 50% of the values have been removed.
Figure 9: lmkage2 dataset: (Left) Complete matrix X. (Right) Matrix whose rows and columns andcolumns have been permuted and 50% of the values have been removed.
Figure 10: linkage2 dataset: Filled-in matrices X at multiple scales: X( 4, 3),X( 1,1),X(5, 3) .
