Figure 1: Results of top-ranked public implementations of SRGAN and the proposed method(SRIM). Notice the artifacts in the results of SRGAN implementations in column (1) at the cen-tre of the wing, which has high-frequency noise (spots) and distorted lines (2) on back of the bench,which has high-frequency noise and hallucinated colours (3) on the gravel, which has noise thatresults in a grainy appearance in the result of Implementation 1, and excess contrast in the result ofImplementation 2, and (4) along the edge of the pyramid, which has noise in the background in theresults of both implementations and hallucinated colours in the result of Implementation 2.
Figure 2: Architecture of one sub-network.
Figure 3: Representative random samples from (a) bicubic interpolation, (b) SRGAN, (c) SRIM and(d) the ground truth.
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of the results of (a) SRGAN, (b) SRIM and (c) the ground truth.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of the results of (a) SRGAN, (b) SRIM and (c) the ground truth.
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison of the results of (a) SRGAN, (b) SRIM and (c) the ground truth.
Figure 7: Different samples for the same input image for (a) SRIM and (b) SRGAN. The pattern ofwhite dots at the edge of the wing is different for different samples of SRIM, whereas it is identical indifferent samples of SRGAN. At the same time, the the different samples of SRIM are all plausibleand are consistent with the input image.
Figure 8: Comparison of SRIM and SRGAN under the high-resolution setting of Set14. The inputresolution is 120 × 125, which is almost 4× the number of pixels in the original setting considered inthe main paper, which used input images of size 64 × 64. Because this setting is easier, all methodsperform better under this setting than under the original setting and so it is more difficult to discernthe relative advantages of different methods. As shown, the proposed method and SRGAN performcomparably under this setting.
Figure 9: Comparison of SRIM to EnhanceNet, SFT network, EDSR network and RDN. Thereis shape distortion in the results of EnhanceNet and RDN, high-frequency noise in the results ofEnhanceNet and SFT network and blurred details in the result of EDSR network. Note that RDNsuper-resolves by a factor of 3 rather than 4, and so a higher-resolution input is provided to RDNthat results in the same output resolution.
