Figure 1: Sample images generated in the experiments with different class ratios. Surprisingly thenetwork is able to do conditional generation even with an imbalance of 02:98 with variety in classcorresponding to 2 % (Digit 4).
Figure 2: Distribution of sample distances from the corresponding class means for different ratios.
Figure 3:	Sample images generated in the experiments with class ratio of 30:70 for digits 3 and 5 inMNIST (left pane), Airplanes and Frogs from CIFAR dataset (right pane). Conditional generationis observed with respective clustering accuracies of 98 and 81.05%.
Figure 4:	Sample images generated in the experiments with class ratio of 07:93 for glass and non-glass faces, 05:95 for rosy cheeks and non rosy cheeks for the CelebA dataset.
Figure 5: Discovery of the facial attribute smile with teeth visible. Sample images generated in theexperiments with class ratio of 70:30 for faces from the CelebA dataset.
Figure 6: Discovery of the attribute facial pose-angle. Sample images generated in the experimentswith class ratio of 10:30:60 for from the CelebA dataset.
Figure 7:	Conditional generation of ten MNIST classes using NEMGAN - left pane: Generateddigits, right pane: Class-wise KL between generated and real data.
Figure 8:	Conditional generation of CIFAR classes using NEMGAN. Every mode in the generatedspace (one row) is dominated by one CIFAR class in the left pane. The separation is seen evidentfrom the class-wise KL divergence(second pane).
Figure 9:	Ablation studies for the latent-space reconstruction terms. Left pane - NEMGAN outputin the absence of h2, right pane - NEMGAN output in the absence of h1. It can be seen that absenceof h2 results in mode mixing and absence of h1 results in less-variety within modes.
Figure 10: Conditional data generation using NEMGAN with incorrect latent space bias with un-supervised and semi-supervised training. From left-to-right, the error in the latent bias is increasedfrom 5% to 20%. While completely unsupervised training does not separate out the semantic modes,but 5% supervision does.
Figure 11: Evaluation of conditional generation using KL divergence in presence of errors in thelatent prior, with unsupervised and semi-supervised training. It is seen that with little supervision theconditional generation is robust and KL divergence is consistently better than unsupervised training.
Figure 12: Inference results of MNIST and CIFAR data. Samples from real test data(top row) arepassed through the g(h1(xr)) network to generate the images(bottom row).
Figure 13: Conditional generation comparison.
Figure 14: Inference results of MNIST data.
Figure 15: Inference results of MNIST data from BiGAN.
Figure 16: Top: real images from CIFAR, bottom: Inference results obtained using NEMGAN.
Figure 17: Top: real images from CIFAR dataset, bottom: Inference results obtained using ALI.
Figure 18: Demonstration of mode separation using NEMGAN. Every row in each figure depictssample from a mode when the NEMGAN is trained only with a single digit type with a latent spacewith ten modes.
Figure 19: Mode counting experiment result for stacked MNIST dataset. NEMGAN is able toproduce variety of modes after training.
Figure 20: Density plots of true data and NEMGAN generator output for 8 component GMM ar-ranged over a circle(a) Real data(a) Generated dataFigure 21: Density plots of true data and NEMGAN generator output for two classes arranged in aninterleaved crescent pattern.
Figure 21: Density plots of true data and NEMGAN generator output for two classes arranged in aninterleaved crescent pattern.
Figure 22: NEMGAN and conventional GAN output in presence of latent space engineering. Imagesof digit 3 and 5 with an imbalance ratio of 30:70 are used in the experiment.
Figure 23: Conditional generation of CIFAR 5 classes using NEMGAN and corresponding KLdivergence matrix. It is seen, and affirmed by KL divergence, that every mode in the generatedspace (one row) represents one CIFAR class.
Figure 24: Conditional generation of CIFAR 10 classes using NEMGAN. It is seen that the everymode in the generated space (one row) is dominated by one CIFAR class.
