Figure 1: Illustration of how FAVAE differs from β-VAE. β-VAE does not accept data sequentially;it cannot differentiate data points from different trajectories or sequences of data points. FAVAEconsiders a sequence of data points, taking all data points in a trajectory as one datum. For example,for a pseudo-dataset representing the trajectory of a submarine (1a,1c), β-VAE accepts 11 differentpositions of the submarine as non-sequential data while FAVAE accepts three different trajectories ofthe submarine as sequential data. Therefore, the latent variable in β-VAE learns only the coordinatesof the submarine, and the latent traversal shows the change in the submarines position. On the otherhand, FAVAE learns the factor that controls the trajectory of the submarine, so the latent traversalshows the change in the submarines trajectory.
Figure 2: FAVAE architecture.
Figure 3: Visualization of latent traversal of β-VAE and FAVAE. On one sampled trajectory (red),each latent variable is traversed and purple and/or blue points are generated. The color correspondsto the value of the traversed latent variable. 3a represents all data trajectories of 2D reaching.
Figure 4: MIG score and reconstruction loss for different values of β . Blue line represents resultswith information capacity C greater than zero; red line represents results with C set to e zero. Notethat x axis is plotted in log scale.
Figure 5: Visualization of latent traversal for 2D Wavy Reaching. Each plot was decoded by travers-ing one latent variable; different colors represent trajectories generated from different values of samelatent variable, z.
Figure 6: Evaluation of ladders (left); structure used for each experiment (right).
Figure 7: Visualization of latent traversal of FAVAE. The horizontal axis represents sequence andthe vertical axis represents the difference of z values.
Figure 8: Visualization of learned disentangled representations for Gripper dataset. Traversed latentvariable shows changing position of blue objects:(b) (9th z in 1st ladder), changing target ball fromred one to blue one and moving accordingly:(c) (1st z in 2nd ladder), reaching ball using differentplan:(d) (2nd z in 2nd ladder), changing plan to place ball from drop ball to placing it gently:(e) (4thz in 2nd ladder).
Figure 9: Visualization of factors of 2D Wavy Reaching training data.
Figure 10: Motions in Sprites dataset. Row 1/2/3 represent walk left/forward/right, row 4/5/6 repre-sent spellcast left/forward/right, and row 7/8/9 represent slash left/forward/right’ respectfully.
