Figure 1: An overview of COCO-GAN (training phase). The full-images are only generated duringtesting phase (Figure 9 in the Appendix).
Figure 2: Without any post-processing, the gen-erated full-images of COCO-GAN are visuallysmooth and globally coherent. More full-imagegeneration results are shown in Figure 12.
Figure 3: Generated samples of micro/macropatches. Each micro patch, macro patch, andfull-image in Figure 2a at the same relative posi-tion uses the same latent vector.
Figure 5: (a) Micro patches interpolation with fixed spatial position. Note that each left-right pair ofinterpolation sample uses the same latent vectors. (b) Full-images interpolation between two latentvectors. More interpolation results are shown in Appendix D.
Figure 4: An example of spatial positions in-terpolation for showing the spatial continuity ofthe micro patches. The spatial conditions areinterpolated between range [-1, 1] of the microcoordinate with a fixed latent vector. More ex-amples are shown in Appendix I.
Figure 6: The generated panorama is cyclic in the horizontal direction since COCO-GAN is trainedwith a cylindrical coordinate system in this experiment. Here we paste the same generated panoramatwice (from 360° to 720°) to illustrate that it indeed has the cyclic property.
Figure 7: Patch-inspired image generation can loosely retain some local structure or global char-acteristic of the original image. The red boxes are the sampled spatial positions that crop the full-images in (a) into the macro patches in (b). (c) & (d) show the patch-inspired generated macroPatcheS and full-images based on Z. The blue boxes visualize the predicted spatial positions cm.
Figure 9: An overview of COCO-GAN during testing phase. The micro patches generated by G aredirectly combined into a full-image as the final output.
Figure 10:	The detailed generator architecture of COCO-GAN for generating micro patches witha size of 32 × 32 pixels. We directly duplicate/remove the last residual block if we need to en-large/reduce the size of output patch.
Figure 11:	The detailed discriminator architecture of COCO-GAN for discriminate macro patcheswith a size of 64 X 64 pixels. We directly duplicate/remove the first residual block if We need toenlarge/reduce the input patch size. Both the content vector prediction head (Q) and the spatialcondition prediction head use the same structure shown in (c).
Figure 12: More full-image generation examples of COCO-GAN. More results across epochs areprovided in following anonymous link: https://goo.gl/A88ewn and https://goo.gl/hgCAeE.
Figure 13: More interpolation examples. Given two latent vectors, COCO-GAN generates the micropatches and full-images that correspond to the interpolated latent vectors.
Figure 14: More examples of generated panoramas. All samples possess the cyclic property alongthe horizontal direction. Each sample is generated with a resolution of 768 × 256 pixels, and micropatch size 64 × 64 pixels.
Figure 15: Comparison with the M method mentioned in Section 3.3 in CelebA 64 × 64 settingshows that the M method is not competitive to COCO-GAN. Note that PD refers to “projectiondiscriminator” and macro indicates the discriminator is in macro patch sized.
Figure 16: Some samples generated by different variants of M. Note that each set of samples isextracted at the epoch when each M variant reaches its lowest FID score. We also provide moresamples at different epochs: https://goo.gl/ChQhCx.
Figure 17: FID score curves of different variants of COCO-GAN in CelebA 64 × 64 setting. Com-bined with Figure 18, the results do not show significant differences in quality between COCO-GANvariants. Therefore, COCO-GAN does not pay significant trade-off for the conditional coordinateproperty.
Figure 18: Some samples generated by different variants of COCO-GAN. Note that each set ofsamples is extracted at the epoch when each M variant reaches its lowest FID score. We alsoprovide more samples for each of the variants at different epochs: https://goo.gl/Wnrppf.
Figure 19: Patch-inspired image generation can loosely retain some local structure or global char-acteristic of the original image. The red boxes are the sampled spatial positions that crop the full-images in (a) into the macro patches in (b). (c) & (d) show the patch-inspired generated macropatches and full-images based on z. The blue boxes visualize the predicted spatial position cm.
Figure 20: Patch-inspired image generation can loosely retain some local structure or global char-acteristic of the original image. The red boxes are the sampled spatial positions that crop the full-images in (a) into the macro patches in (b). (c) & (d) show the patch-inspired generated macropatches and full-images based on Z. The blue boxes visualize the predicted spatial position cm.
Figure 21: Both Wasserstein distance and FID through time show that the training of COCO-GANis stable. Both two figures are logged while training on CelebA with 128 × 128 resolution.
Figure 22: Spatial interpolation shows the spatial continuity of the micro patches. The spatial con-ditions are interpolated between range [-1, 1] of the micro coordinate with a fixed latent vector.
