Figure 1: Left: MNIST morphometries—stroke thickness and length (not shown), width, height andslant of digits. Right: MNIST perturbations (many more examples of each type in Appendix B).
Figure 2: Stages of the image processing pipeline. Left to right: original image, upscaled image,binarised image, distance transform, skeleton, downscaled image.
Figure 3: Distribution of morphological attributes per digit class in the plain MNIST training dataset1Up- and downscaling by a factor of f are done with bicubic interpolation and Gaussian smoothing (band-width σ = 2f /6), following scikit-image defaults (van der Walt et al., 2014).
Figure 4: Distribution of morphometric attributes for MNIST test dataset and samples from somegenerative models. Diagonals show marginal histograms and KDEs, upper-triangular plots showpairwise log-histograms and lower-triangular plots show pairwise KDEs.
Figure 5:	Partial correlations between inferred latent codes and morphometrics of test images. Circlearea and colour strength are proportional to correlation magnitude, blue is positive and red is negative.
Figure 6:	Partial correlations between 1000 sampled latent codes and morphometrics of the corre-sponding generated imagesThe second setting was designed to investigate whether the model could disentangle the conceptof thickness, by including an additional continuous latent code and training on a dataset withexaggerated thickness variations. We constructed this dataset by randomly interleaving plain, thinnedand thickened digit images in equal proportions. Since the perturbations were applied completely atrandom, we expect a trained generative model to identify that thickness should be largely independentof the other morphological attributes. We refer to this set-up as InfoGAN-B. Table 2 summarisesthe different experimental settings, for reference.
Figure 7: InfoGAN latent space traversals(b) InfoGAN-B: two-dimensional traversal ofc4 × c3 (‘thickness’ × ‘slant’)(a) INFOGAN-A: one-dimensional traversals of c1 (top,‘digit type’) and c3 (bottom, ‘slant’). Samples in each rowshare the values of remaining latent variables and noise.
Figure 8: Partial correlations of inferred latent codes with test morphometrics (InfoGAN-C)type of local perturbation. The model investigated here, dubbed InfoGAN-C (cf. Table 2), had a10-way categorical, two continuous and two binary codes, and was trained with a dataset of plain,swollen and fractured digits (randomly mixed as above).
