Figure 1: Overview of the proposed Collaborative Drawing (CoDraw) task. The game consists oftwo players - Teller and Drawer. The Teller sees an abstract scene, while the Drawer sees an emptycanvas. Both players need to collaborate and communicate so that the Drawer can reconstruct theimage of the Teller by dragging and dropping clip art objects.
Figure 2: A sketch of our model architectures for the neural Drawer and Teller. The Drawer (left)conditions on the current state of the canvas and a BiLSTM encoding of the previous utterance todecide which clip art pieces to add to a scene. The Teller (right) uses an LSTM language modelwith attention to the scene (in blue) taking place before and after the LSTM. The “thought bubbles”represent intermediate supervision using an auxiliary task of predicting which clip art have not beendescribed yet. In reinforcement learning, the intermediate scenes produced by the drawer are usedto calculate rewards. Note that the language used here was constructed for illustrative purposes, andthat the messages in our dataset are more detailed and precise.
Figure 3: A rule-based nearest-neighbor Teller/Drawer pair “trained” on the same data outperformshumans for this scene according to the similarity metric, but the language used by the models doesn’talways correspond in meaning to the actions taken. The three panels on the left show a scene fromthe test set and corresponding human/model reconstructions. The two panels on the right show theTeller message and Drawer action from two rounds of conversation by the machine agents.
Figure 4:	User interface for Teller. The left image is one of abstract scenes from Zitnick & Parikh(2013). The Teller sends messages using an input box. The Teller has a single chance to peekDrawer's canvas to correct mistakes. When the Teller feels good to finish, the Teller can finish thesession.
Figure 5:	User interface for a Drawer. The Drawer has an empty canvas and a randomly generateddrawing palette of Mike, Jenny, and 18 other objects, chosen from a library of 58 clip arts. Weensure that using the available objects, Drawer can fully reproduce the scene. Using the library, theDrawer can draw on the canvas in a drag-and-drop fashion. Drawer can also send messages using agiven input box. However, the peek button is disabled. Only the Teller can use it.
Figure 6: Statistics of the CoDraW dataset. (a) The distribution of the number of tokens in Teller's(blue) and Drawer's (green) messages. Notice that the number of single-token messages of Drawer is41,195 (62.06%). The medians for Teller and Drawer are 16 and 1, respectively. (b) The distributionof the numbers of conversational rounds. The median is 7 rounds. (c) The distribution of the durationof dialog sessions. The median is 6 minutes.
Figure 7: The distribution of overall scores (section 3.3) at the end of the dialog.
Figure 8: Average scene similarity plotted for different conversation rounds. On the left, onlyconversations that have reached the given number of rounds are included. On the right, conversationsthat end early are padded to 35 rounds through the addition of empty messages/actions.
Figure 9:	Examples from the Collaborative Drawing (CoDraw) dataset, chosen at random from thetest set. The images depict the Drawer’s canvas after each round of conversation. From left to right,we show rounds one through four, then the last round, followed by the ground truth scene. Thecorresponding conversations between the Teller (T) and Drawer (D) are shown below the images.
Figure 10:	Drawer model behavior where the Teller is simulated by replaying messages associatedwith three randomly-selected scenes from the test set. The images depict the Drawer’s canvas aftereach round of conversation. For each of the three scenes, the behavior of the Rule-Based Nearest-Neighbor Drawer is shown in the upper row and the behavior of the Neural Network Drawer isshown in the lower row.
Figure 11:	A comparison of the descriptions generated by each of our Teller models for tworandomly-sampled scenes from the test set.
Figure 12:	Dialogs from our best Teller model (scene2seq with an auxiliary loss and RL fine-tuning)communicating with our best Drawer model (Neural Network Drawer). The dialogs feature the samescenes as in Figure 9, which were sampled at random from the test set. From left to right, we showthe first to the fifth rounds of conversations, followed by the ground truth scene. Our Teller modelchose to use exactly five rounds for each of these four scenes. The corresponding conversationsbetween Teller (T) and Drawer (D) are shown below the images.
