Figure 1: Reconstructed Sprites test video (bpp=0.06, PSNR=44.6 dB), H.265 (bpp=0.86, PSNR =21.1 dB), and VP9 (bpp=0.57, PSNR = 26.0 dB), see Section 4. In contrast to our method, H.265and VP9 show artifacts of block motion prediction. Our method uses a fraction of the bit rate.
Figure 2: Operational diagram of our compression codec. A video segment is encoded into per-frame latent variables zt and per-segment global state f, which are then quantized and arithmeticallyencoded into binary according to the prior model. To recover an approximation to the original video,the latent variables are arithmetically decoded from the binary and passed through the decoder.
Figure 3:	Rate-distortion curves on three datasets measured in PSNR (higher corresponds to lowerdistortion). Legend shared. Solid lines correspond to our models, with LSTMP-LG proposed.
Figure 4:	Average bits of information stored in f and z1:T with PSNR 43.2, 37.1, 30.3 for differentmodels in (a, b, c). Entropy drops with the frame index as the models adapt to the video sequence.
Figure 5: Compressed videos by our LSTMP-LG model and VP9 in the low bit rate regime. Ourapproach achieves better quality on specialized content (BAIR, left) and comparable visual qualityon generic video content (Kinetics, right) compared to VP9.
Figure 6: Inference network diagram for the global state f. The features from the video segmentare processed by a bi-directional LSTM (with hidden states gf, hf) which is used to infer the globalstate.
Figure 7: Empirical distributions of the posterior of inference model and ground truth prior modelin one specific rate-distortion BAIR example.
Figure 8: Rate-distortion curves on three datasets measured in MS-SSIM (higher corresponds tolower distortion). Legend shared. Solid lines correspond to our models, with LSTMP-LG proposed.
Figure 9: Rate-distortion curves on the Kinetics dataset measured in PSNR. Codec performance isevaluated on video segments of T = 10, 30, and 100 frames. Our best performing method (trainedand evaluated on T = 10 frames) is shown in red for comparison.
