Figure 1: Detection of anomalies on a Metal Anomaly dataset. (a) Test images showing anomalies(black spots). (b) An Autoencoder-based approach produces blurry reconstructions to express modeluncertainty (c) Our model: Consistency-based anomaly detection (ConAD) gives the network moreexpressive power with a multi-headed decoder (also known as multiple-hypotheses networks). Theresulting anomaly scores are hence much clearer in our framework ConAD.
Figure 2: Local and global neighborhood-based anomaly detection: Here, two pixel dimensions (a)with details that are hard to capture in the conditional space are shown. The red dot is a new point.
Figure 3: Illustration of multiple-hypotheses networks compared to single-hyptohesis network.. OurConAD framework (c), which integrates a discriminator D to avoid support of non-realistic datamodes and foster higher mode coverage with the generated hypotheses.
Figure 4: Flipped half-moon data-set: mapping from x to y is not unique, e.g. for x = 0, there arefour different modes. Left to right: with an increasing number of mixture components in a mixturedensity network, the data distribution can be modeled increasingly well.
Figure 5: Flipped half-moon dataset: conditional prediction of y based on x. Red points are sam-ples from true distribution while blue points represent samples from distributions approximations.
Figure 6: (a) shows a modeling task with one extremely dominant data mode (dense region) andone under-represented mode. (b) shows how multiple-hypotheses predictions are used to cover datamodes. Hypotheses tend to concentrate on dominant mode, which leads to over-fitting in this region.
Figure 7: ConAD: our multiple-hypotheses autoencoder and with the training discriminator training.
Figure 8: Flipped half-moon dataset: conditional prediction of y based on X. Red points are sam-ples from true distribution while blue points represent samples from distributions approximations.
Figure 9: Metal Anomaly dataset. Image reconstructions: reconstructions from uni-modal modelsare blurry at convergence. Using our ConAD-approach (last two rows), the maximally consistentreconstruction is closer to the original image, capturing many more details needed to differentiatebetween normal data noise and real anomalies, such as black spots or scratches. The likelihoodmaximizer in the hypotheses space is much closer to the original and also more realistic. Theresiduals are significantly clearer for our ConAD-method.
