Figure 1: Coupled state estimation of Mozart’s string quartet number 2 in D Major, K155, movement1, from measure 1, rendered by the Verovio Humdrum Viewer. A representation (blue) of the stateof each part is built at each time step, based on the previous state’s representation and the currentcontent of the part. A representation of the global state of the score is built from the previous globalstate and a sum (red) of the current states of each part. For each part, new notes (purple) are predictedusing features of the global representation and the representation of the relevant part.
Figure 2: Left: a flattened description of the history tensor xt,p,n of features for a Haydn stringquartet: opus 55 number 3, first movement, from measure 16. Parts are indicated by columns. Aframe of time is indicated by a row. Each event in a part is denoted by a pair of duration and note(s),separated by a colon. Durations are denominated in beats. An asterisk indicated continuation of theprevious note(s). Right: the score corresponding to the history tensor (in a score, the time and partaxes are transposed).
Figure 3: Left: an absolute pitch predictor that learns individual classifiers for each pitch-class.
Figure 4: Beethoven’s piano sonata number 8 (Pathetique) movement 2, from measure 9, renderedby the Verovio Humdrum Viewer. Although visually rendered on two staves, this sonata consists offour parts: a high sequence of quarter and eighth notes, two middle sequences of sixteenth notes,and a low sequence of quarter notes.
Figure 5: Mozart’s piano sonata number 8 in A minor, movement 1, from measure 1, rendered bythe Verovio Humdrum Viewer.
Figure 6: A visualization of the score from Figure 5, discretized at eighth-note resolution.
Figure 7: Two scores with the same raster representation as the score in Figure 5, if only a single bitis used to indicate the occurrence of note n at time t. Other variants of these scores with the sameraster encoding are also possible. The popular dataset introduced by Boulanger-Lewandowski et al.
Figure 8: The Mozart from Figure 5, with red lines that indicate the boundaries of events under arun-length factorization of the score. Notes in the treble staff are chopped up into eight-note runs,so instead of predicting note durations (quarter, dotted-eighth, sixteenth, etc.) we instead predictfragments of notes (eighth, continue eighth, continue eighth, etc.).
