Figure 1: Examples of chemical information extraction (the parts in the same color means the samechemical constituent name)In the following passage, we consider the differences between non-systematic names and systematicnames as ”error”2. In view of natural language processing, the error types of non-systematic namescan be summarized by four types: 1. Spelling error. It means that non-systematic names justhave slightly differences from systematic names in spelling; 2. Ordering error. It means that thegroups in a non-systematic name are in wrong order; 3. Common name error. As mentionedabove, many chemical substances have common names or proprietary names which look totallydifferent from their systematic names; 4. Synonym error. It means that the words in the non-systematic names are different from those in the systematic names but they share the same root ofword. In fact, it is the error type which happens most often. For example, 2-(Acetyloxy)benzoic Acidhas synonyms Acetylsalicylic Acid and Acetysal and these three words share the same root of word”Acety”. Some examples of different types of errors are shown in Table 1. What is worth mentioningis that several types of error can appear at the same time in a single non-systematic name, especiallyfor the ordering error and synonym error. The mixed types of error make this task very challenging.
Figure 2: Distribution of the Levenshtein distance between non-systematic names and systematicnames2	Proposed frameworksOur framework consists of spelling error correction, byte pair encoding tokenization and sequenceto sequence model which can be summarized in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Illustration of the frameworkthe vocabulary of systematic elemental words and remove the rest. By this way, the vocabulary webuild from the non-systematic names is the set of common names or synonyms. We then combinethese two vocabularies together to get a final elemental vocabulary.
Figure 4: Example of BK-Tree built from a part of our dataset. Each node is an elemental word.
Figure 5: Visualization of attentionsFigure 6: Accuracy for different lengths7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019Table 5: Results of different Levenshtein distance thresholds for the spelling error correction. Foreach threshold, the first line is the accuracy after just doing the spelling error correction. The secondline is the accuracy after processing the non-systematic name by our whole framework. The numbersof BPE merge operation are all 5000.
Figure 6: Accuracy for different lengths7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019Table 5: Results of different Levenshtein distance thresholds for the spelling error correction. Foreach threshold, the first line is the accuracy after just doing the spelling error correction. The secondline is the accuracy after processing the non-systematic name by our whole framework. The numbersof BPE merge operation are all 5000.
