Figure 1: Trees representation of Lp-nested distributions. a) Tree of the example provided in Eq. 6.
Figure 2: Leptokurtic and platykurtic priors encourage different orientations of the encoding ofthe (x,y) location of a sprite in the dSprites dataset. A leptokurtic distribution (here the Laplacedistribution) has, in two dimensions, contour lines along diagonal directions and expects most ofthe probability mass around 0. Because the (x,y) locations in dSprites are distributed in a square,the projection of the coordinates onto the diagonal fits better to the Laplace prior. A platykurticdistribution however is more similar to a uniform distribution, with axis aligned contour lines in twodimensions. This fits better to an orthogonal projection of the (x,y) location. The red and blue colourcoding denotes the value of the latent variable for the respective (x,y) location of a sprite.
Figure 3: Disentangled representations for ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAE on the dSprites dataset. Wefollow standard practice established in Chen et al. (2018) for visualizing latent representations andadditionally show images generated by traversals of the latent along the respective axis. The red andblue colour coding in the first column denotes the value of the latent variable for the respective x,y-coordinate of the sprite in the image. Coloured lines indicate the object shape with red for ellipse,green for square, and blue for heart. (a) Even without a modification of the ELBO (β = 1.0) theproposed ISA prior leads to a disentangled representation. (b) When combining the ISA-model withβ-TCVAE, a model with a high disentanglement score of MIG = 0.54 can be reached. This is thehighest score reported for dSprites in the literature. ISA-layouts: (a) l0 = 5, l1,...,5 = 5, p0 = 2.1,p1,...,5 = 2.2 (b) l0 = 5, l1,...,5 = 4, p0 = 2.1, p1,...,5 = 2.2Disentanglement Metrics To provide a quantitative evaluation of the disentanglement we com-pute the disentanglement metric Mutual Information Gap (MIG) that was proposed in Chen et al.
Figure 4: Comparison of the proposed ISA-VAE model with β-VAE and β-TCVAE. Evaluation isperformed with respect to the quality of the disentanglement (MIG score, solid line) and reconstruc-tion quality (dashed line) for different values ofβ. The proposed models ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAEreach a disentangled representation for small values of β which allows better reconstructions due tothe trade-off between the β-weight of the KL-term and the reconstruction loss in the modified ELBO.
Figure 5: Comparison of the different approaches using the optimal β value in terms of MIG score.
Figure 6: Disentanglement score (MIG) with respect to the reconstruction quality for different lay-outs of the ISA subspaces. The number of subspaces l0 = 5 is constant throughout all experiments.
Figure 7: Disentangled representations for β-VAE, β-TCVAE, ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAE and latenttraversals for the ellipse shape.
Figure 8: Disentangled representations for β-VAE, β-TCVAE, ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAE and latenttraversals for the square shape.
Figure 9: Disentangled representations for β-VAE, β-TCVAE, ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAE and latenttraversals for the heart shape.
Figure 10: Reconstructed images for β-VAE, β-TCVAE, ISA-VAE and ISA-TCVAE using the mod-els from figure 5 and appendix A.3. Note that because of the trade-off between disentanglement andreconstruction loss the images reconstructed with β-VAE and β-TCVAE appear much noisier thanthe models with the ISA prior. Further, the ISA prior allows to reconstruct more details of the heartshape than β-VAE and β-TCVAE.
