Figure 1: Contour plots of different permutation-invariant point set loss function on a simple prob-lem of matching two one-dimensional target points located at -1 and 1.
Figure 2: Qualitative test set results for bounding box prediction on the MnistDetect datasetwith a convolutional neural network, trained end-to-end with different loss functions. Groundtruthbounding boxes in green, predictions in red.
Figure 3: Performance of the ‘holographic’ loss function measured in terms of residual Hausdorff-distance between candidate- and target-set after minimizing log(10-100 + LHUo=l,Z2 (C, U)) withSciPy's scipy.optimize.fmin 上fgs to gtol 10-8 for 1000 examples (per number of points)of point-configurations C, Z where each point is drawn uniformly from the 2-d unit disc. Solid lines:percentiles for minimizing as described. Dashed lines: percentiles when artificially limiting numeri-cal accuracy of the potential and gradient by adding and then substracting again 1.0. This effectivelyturns 64-bit floating point arithmetics into 53-bit fixed-point arithmetics by fixing the floating ex-ponent. Under these conditions, the loss function behaves as is expected from condition numberanalysis, being useful to about N = 15 points. When allowing the floating point exponent to adapt,this loss function can in principle match up point sets well beyond N = 40 points when using 64-bitfloat arithmetics.
Figure 4: A configuration that leads to a local minimum of the target-centered onesided versionsof the Hausdorff distance and the sum of minimal distances. All three target points have the sameclosest prediction point, which is located exactly in their “center of mass”.
Figure 5: Gradient flows illustrating the behavior of the Holographic loss function. Left column: Ifthere are reasonably clear ways to match up the two point sets, the gradient flow tends to find thatidentification and moves each point simultaneously in a meaningful way. This allows each entry ofthe gradient to forward meaningful information towards earlier layers in ML training, unlike withHausdorff-distance. Right column: In more complex cases (such as two points almost coinciding),multiple points may travel alongside one another until the degeneracy finally gets broken.
