Figure 1: Proposed generative network with dual importance weightsTarget Samplesin Encoded SpaceX Target Sample• Generated SampleTwo SamplesGenerated Samplesin Encoded SpaceFigure 2: Distance calculation between generated and real data samples in encoded spacewith the samples generated from different distribution. The basic idea of importance sampling is togive weights to the samples for the proper representation of target distribution. This weight adjuststhe contribution of each sample to the representation so that we are able to improve the approx-imation quality. In GAN, we assume that current generated samples represent the distribution ofcomplete outputs of the generator. And we expect the generated samples ultimately represent thedistribution of real data. Diesendruck et al. (2018) proposes importance weighted generative net-works with modified adversarial loss function from differently contributing samples of mini-batch.
Figure 2: Distance calculation between generated and real data samples in encoded spacewith the samples generated from different distribution. The basic idea of importance sampling is togive weights to the samples for the proper representation of target distribution. This weight adjuststhe contribution of each sample to the representation so that we are able to improve the approx-imation quality. In GAN, we assume that current generated samples represent the distribution ofcomplete outputs of the generator. And we expect the generated samples ultimately represent thedistribution of real data. Diesendruck et al. (2018) proposes importance weighted generative net-works with modified adversarial loss function from differently contributing samples of mini-batch.
Figure 3: Experimental results compared to VEEGAN(Srivastava et al. (2017)) and UnrolledGAN(Metz et al. (2016)): 2D Ring, 2D Grid(isotropic and unisotropic), and 3D Cube testset. Pro-posed method converges faster than state-of-the-art methods.
Figure 5: Generated stacked MNIST samples from trained models. We refer these images fromSrivastava et al. (2017) paper except our result.
Figure 6: Experimental results are compared to VEEGAN and DCGAN using CIFAR 10 dataset:VEEGAN and DCGAN frequently suffer from mode collapsing in yellow circles.
