Figure 1: Illustrative examples from the assay "Gametocytocidal compounds screen" that are (a)labeled as active, and (b) labeled as inactive. Cells treated with active compounds are decreasedin number and show a distinct morphology, which is clearly visible on the images. However, cellsegmentation and feature extraction can be hampered because of the strong morphological changes.
Figure 2: Schematic representation of the GapNet architecture. A standard CNN architecture with asequence of 2D convolutions and max pooling is combined with global average pooling operationsof particular feature maps. The resulting feature vectors are concatenated and fed into two fully-connected layers and an output layer.
Figure 3: Boxplot comparing the performance of all methods. The x-axis displays the comparedmethods and the y-axis displays the performance across the 209 different assays as boxplots. GapNetexhibits the best median AUC value, whereas FNN exhibits the worst.
Figure 4: Comparison of FNN performance with GapNet over all tasks. The x-axis displays the per-formance in terms of AUC of GapNet at the 209 assays, whereas the y-axis shows the performanceof FNN. For a large number of assays, there is no significant difference in predictive performance(grey dots), whereas for 29 assays, GapNet significantly outperformed FNN (blue dots) and for 3assays FNN significantly outperformed GapNet (red dots). Overall, predictive performance of thetwo compared methods is highly correlated across assays, which indicates that if a biological effectexpresses in morphological changes in the cells, both approaches capture it to a certain degree.
Figure 5: Examples from the assay "Gametocytocidal compounds screen" treated with compoundspredicted and labeled as active. While cell density is not significantly different from untreatedsamples, cells show distinct morphological changes. These changes can hamper segmentation andfeature extraction algorithms, thus ignoring these indicative cells.
Figure A1: Relation between the number of measured compounds for each assay and the predictiveperformance of the FNN (left) and GapNet (right). For the FNN approach the number of measuredcompounds strongly influences performance while this thrend is less pronounced for the CNN basedend-to-end approach. Other end-to-end approaches look similar to GapNet.
