Figure 1: Given a black box model and unlabeled samples (new unlabeled data or training data withlabels discarded), our approach leverages model distillation to learn feature shapes that describe therelationship between input features and model predictions.
Figure 2: From SHAP to gSHAP. Bluepoints are individual SHAP values; redline is gSHAP feature shape.
Figure 3: Three of ten feature shapes learned for F1 (top row) and F2 (bottom row) by small (1H-8)and large (2H-512,512) nets. To view shapes learned for all features, see the Appendix.
Figure 4: Example feature shapes from Magic (left), and Loan (right). SAT and SAS tend to agree.
Figure 5: Fidelity (RMSE) of SAT compared to other inter-pretable models on Bikeshare (left) and Pneumonia (right),as a function of model-specific parameter K .
Figure 6: Feature shapes from controlled experiments on real data. Left: Label modification experi-ment. Center and right: Data modification experiment. See details in Section 4.4.
Figure A1: Feature shapes for features x1 to x9 of F1 from Section 4.1. Notice how x9, whichis a noise feature that does not affect F1, has been assigned an importance of approximately 0throughout its range. The feature shape of x10, another noise feature, is very similar to x9 and hencenot included here.
Figure A2: Feature shapes for features x1 to x9 of F2 from Section 4.1. Notice how x9, whichis a noise feature that does not affect F2 , has been assigned an importance of approximately 0throughout its range. The feature shape of x10, another noise feature, is very similar to x9 and hencenot included here.
Figure A3: Model output shown to SAT-5 subjects.
Figure A4: Model output shown to DT-4 subjects. This visual presentation was simplified fromthe visual presentation in Figure A7, removing the color and number of samples in each node, toimprove readability for the user study.
Figure A5: 3 of 16 features with expected monotonically increasing/decreasing patterns in the FICOdata. “Months Since Most Recent Trade Open”, the leftmost figure, was expected to decrease mono-tonically, but actually increased monotonically according to all explanations. The two figures on theright are two related features, “Months Since Oldest Trade Open” and “Number of Trades Open inLast 12 Months”, both of which exhibit the expected monotonically decreasing/increasing patterns.
Figure A6: An important pair-wise interaction in Bikeshare.
Figure A7: Tree of depth 6 (64 leaves), the least deep tree that matched SAT’s fidelity. This usesthe default tree visualizer in scikit-learn. For the tree of depth 4 (DT-4) presented in the user study(Figure A4), we removed the color and number of samples in each node to increase readability.
