Figure 1: Comparison of results for the Lorenz dataset (dz = 3) between GfLDS and VIND: (left)R2k comparison; (center) R120 as a function of dimension of the latent space; (right) VIND’s inferredvalidation trajectories for this dataset.
Figure 2: Electrophysiology data. (left) Sample cell spike rates, t = 0 signals the start of the responseepoch (center) Performance of explained variance (R2) using different setups of VIND and othermodels. (right) Performance of forward interpolation (Rk2) using two setups of VIND models.
Figure 3: Summary of the LLDS/VIND fit to the Allen dataset: (left) The dataset, neurons respond toan input current; (center) VIND vs GfLDS comparison for the best 5D fits; (right) R120 for differentdimensions. The performance increases up to dZ = 5 possibly indicating the hidden dimensionalityof the system.
Figure 4: Inferred sample paths: (left) Original data (green) versus the 10-step (2ms) forwardinterpolation given by VIND and by GfLDS; (center) Latent trajectories for a 5D VIND fit of thisdata, showing behavior similar to the Hodgkin-Huxley gating variables; (right) A 3D cross-section ofthe latent space showing the representation of the spikes as big cycles (red) and the transient periods(blue).
Figure 5: Widefield Imaging Data: (top-left) An example frame of the data. The temporal dynamicsand behavior signal are characterized by X after preprocessing, which are simultaneously modeledusing both GfLDS and VIND. (bottom-left) Variance weighted average R2 values for k-step forwardinterpolation, with dZ = 9. (center) An example fit of X using VIND on held out data. Only 4 of thesignals in the 148-dimensional X signal are shown here. (right) A different VIND model was fit tothe temporal dynamics of only the left hand side (LHS) of the brain (XLHS). The latents (ZLHS) areused to reconstruct the temporal dynamics of the right hand side (RHS) of the video (XRHS). Fitsare shown on 4 of the 66-dimensional XRHS in held out data.
Figure 6: Examples of latent dimension dynamics for Gaussian and Poisson VIND in validation data.
Figure 7: Data (green) versus simulation of the observations (red) from the smoothed path: 10 stepsahead (left), 20 steps ahead (center), and 30 steps ahead (right). Some signs of deterioration of theprediction start to appear for the latter (failed spikes, late spiking times).
Figure 8: Different views of a 3D cross section of 5D latent paths for two different trials, showinghow the paths occupy different regions of state-space depending on the value of the constant inputcurrent.
