Figure 1: Real samples from a mixture of eight Gaussians in red; generated samples in blue. (a)The generator is mode-collapsed in the bottom right. (b) The discriminator learns to recognize thegenerator oversampling this region and pushes the generator away, so the generator gravitates towarda new mode. (c) The discriminator continues to chase the generator, causing the generator to move ina clockwise direction. (d) The generator eventually returns to the same mode as (a). Such oscillationsare common while training a vanilla GAN. Best seen as a video: https://youtu.be/91a2gPWngo8.
Figure 2: Each line represents the discriminator’s test accuracy on the fake GAN datasets. Note thesharp decrease in the discriminator’s ability to recognize previous fake samples upon fine-tuning onthe next dataset using SGD (left). Forgetting still occurs with EWC (right), but is less severe.
Figure 3: Image samples from generated “fake MNIST” datasetsO	m		C J	3		ɪ			⅜	曳五		t	A	且		W				ɪ夕	Ξ		ɪ	3		ɪ			ɪ	_1D		!	亘	ɪ		c*r ɔ			ɪ	ɪo	1_		ɪ			S			⅞	ɪ立	/		3			ɪ			*	ɪ0	D	I	2			⅞			亘	qO	ɪ		ɪ	ɪ		W			Z	ɪO	/		瓦	3					8	ɪ~0	/		ʃ	N		5			⅛	9(d) D2g0en13Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019C Examples of Generated SamplesSample generations are plotted during training at 5000 step intervals in Figure 4. While vanilla GANoccasionally recovers the true distribution, more often than not, the generator collapses and thenbounces around. Spectral Normalized GAN converges to the true distribution quickly in most runs,but it mode collapses and exhibits the same behavior as GAN in others. EWC-GAN consistentlydiffuses to all modes, tending to find the true distribution sooner with lower α. We omit IS-GAN, as
Figure 4: Each row shows the evolution of generator samples at 5000 training step intervals forGAN, SN-GAN, and EWC-GAN for two α values. The proposed EWC-GAN models have hyper-parameters matching the corresponding α in Table 1. Each frame shows 10000 samples drawn fromthe true eight Gaussians mixture (red) and 10000 generator samples (blue).
Figure 5: Generated image samples from random draws of EWC+GANs.
