Figure 1: Alignment of circular manifolds. (a) A circular manifold was generated by sampling360 points from two MNIST examples of the digit ’3’ rotated in a complete circle. The diffusiongeometry that results is circular, but the phase of each digit on the circle is arbitrary. (b) Top: Analignment is obtained by rotating the two embeddings into the latent space of the other. Bottom: Thenearest neighbors of a given point in the unaligned embedding are within-sample. Alignment createsconnections between samples that are faithful to the phase of the digit, as seen by the presence ofout-of-sample nearest neighbors.
Figure 2: Recovery of k-neighborhoods under feature corruption. (a) At each iteration, two sets X (1)and X(2) of N(1) = N(2) = 1000 points were sampled from MNIST. X(2) was then distorted by a784 × 784 corruption matrix Op for various identity percentages p (see section 3.2). Subsequently,a lazy classification scheme was used to classify points in X(2) Op using a nearest neighbor votefrom X(1). Results for harmonic alignment with different filterbank sizes, mutual nearest neighbors(MNN), and classification without alignment are shown. (b) Reconstruction of digits with only 25%uncorrupted features. Left: Input digits. Left middle: 75% of the pixels in the input are corrupted.
Figure 3: Comparison to other unsupervised alignment methods. (a) Runtime as a function of inputsize. Algorithhm implementations were obtained from the authors’ github repository. Runtimeperformance was measured on an Intel 3.8 GHz i7-7700HQ laptop with 64 GB Dual-channel DDR4memory at 2400 MHz running Pop!OS 4.15 and MATLAB R2018a. (b) Lazy classification accuracyrelative to input size. For each input size N, the average of 3 iterations of lazy classification of N/2unlabeled randomly corrupted digits with 35% preserved pixels (see section 3.2) is reported. (c)Transfer learning performance. For each ratio, 1,000 uncorrupted, labeled digits were sampled fromMNIST. 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000 (x-axis) unlabeled points were sampled and corrupted with35% column identity. The mean of three iterations of lazy classification for each method is reported.
Figure 4: Batch effect removal in biological data. 4,000 cells were subsampled from two single-cellimmune profiles obtained via mass cytometry on blood samples of two patients infected with Denguefever. Top: Both patients exhibit heightened interferon gamma (x-axis), a pro-inflammatory cytokinewhich is associated with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα, y-axis) Bottom: IFNγ histograms foreach batch. EMD: ”Earth Mover’s Distance” (a) Data before denoising. (b) Denoising of unaligneddata enhances a technical effect between samples in IFNγ. (c) Harmonic alignment corrects theIFNγ shift.
