Figure 1: An overview of the proposed SST. Different shapes represent the input data with differentunderlying distribution, and different colors (orange, blue, and green) are for different classes. Inthe initial training dataset, only three classes with their corresponding distributions (#, 2, 4) existand are used for initial training. Then the unlabeled data which include unseen distribution (F, C)are inputted to the classification as well as the selection network. At the bottom right, unlabeledsamples with higher selection network output values than a certain threshold are denoted by yellowand selected to be included in the training process for the next iteration, while the remaining are notused for training.
Figure 2: SST result on CIFAR-10, SVHN, and CIFAR-100 datasets with 5 runs. The x-axis is theiteration, the blue circle is the average of the number of data used for training, and the red diamondis the average accuracy.
Figure 3: Result of new SSL problems on CIFAR-10 dataset with 5 runs. (a) number of data withiteration in decay mode (b) accuracy with iteration in decay mode (c) number of data with iteration infixed mode(d) accuracy with iteration in fixed mode. % means the ratio of the number of non-animalclasses in the unlabeled data.
Figure 5: Synthetic datasets (Two moons) Top : training dataset, Bottom : test resultiter = 36iter = 39iter = 41iter = 46iter = 50Figure 6: Synthetic datasets (Four spin) Top : training dataset, Bottom : test resultFigure 4 shows the basic setting of the synthetic dataset, and Figure 5 and 6 show the progress ofthe SST algorithm. The SST algorithm improves performance by gradually expanding certain datain a synthetic dataset.
Figure 6: Synthetic datasets (Four spin) Top : training dataset, Bottom : test resultFigure 4 shows the basic setting of the synthetic dataset, and Figure 5 and 6 show the progress ofthe SST algorithm. The SST algorithm improves performance by gradually expanding certain datain a synthetic dataset.
Figure 7: Result of new SSL problems on CIFAR-100 dataset with 5 runs. (a) number of data withiteration in decaying threshold (b) accuracy with iteration in decaying threshold (c) number of datawith iteration in fixed threshold (d) accuracy with iteration in fixed threshold. % means the ratio ofnon-animal classes in the unlabeled data.
