Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
NEGATION HANDLING FOR AMHARIC SENTIMENT CLASSIFI-
CATION
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
User generated content contains opinionated texts not only in dominant languages
(like English) but also less dominant languages( like Amharic). However, nega-
tion handling techniques that supports for sentiment detection is not developed in
such less dominant language(i.e. Amharic). Negation handling is one of the chal-
lenging tasks for sentiment classification. Thus, this work builds negation han-
dling schemes which enhances Amharic Sentiment classification. The proposed
Negation Handling framework combines the lexicon based approach and character
ngram based machine learning model. The performance of framework is evaluated
using the annotated Amharic News Comments. The system is outperforming the
best of all models and the baselines by an accuracy of 98.0. The result is compared
with the baselines (without negation handling and word level ngram model).
keywords:Negation Handling Algorithm, Amharic Sentiment Analysis,
Amharic Sentiment lexicon, char level, word level ngram, machine learning,
hybrid
1	INTRODUCTION
Due to the emergence of social media including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Insta-grams, LinkedIn
and so on, the number of users who participates and consumes in-formation is increasing very fast.
Users usually express their feelings, emotions and opinions as comments in response to the posted
news, photo, audio and video. The texts in social media are informal as it contains spelling errors,
slangs, abbreviations or users might use different language. Preprocessing these unstructured and
informal texts is very challenging prior to sentiment analysis. Preprocessing includes tokeniza-tion,
punctuation mark removal, stop word removal, abbreviation expansion, language detection, spelling
error handling, normalization and stemming. The preprocessing task could be harder for under re-
source languages (e.g. Amharic). Sentiment Analysis is the process of framing the unstructured texts
to detect, extract and classify opinion words. Currently, opinionated sources are increasing in lan-
guages other than English. Amharic is one of these resource-limited languages. However, Amharic
sentiment analysis researches are very few as it has no sufficient linguistic resources for linguis-
tic preprocessing and sentiment analysis. There are several challenges in lexicon based sentiment
analysis. One of these is that handling negation in the text. The most common approach for nega-
tion handling is carried out relying on negation keywords. However, it is challenging to identify
the scope of negation where the process of correctly identifying the part of the text affected by the
presence of negation word. In most negation handling researches, simple approach of detection of
negation scope is used. Amharic is one of the most spoken Semitic languages in the world next to
Arabic. Amharic is morphologically rich and this adds another challenge to detect and extract opin-
ion words in sentiment analysis. Inspired by the aforementioned preprocessing problems, negation
handling is never studied in Amharic language to the best of our knowledge. Thus, the main aim
of this research is develop an automatic method to handle negation and combined with char ngram
features for Amharic Sentiment Analysis relying on these linguistic features. The research questions
to be addressed in this work are as follows: (a) how can we automatically detect negation words
in Amharic texts?, (b) how can we design a framework for handling negation in Amharic sentiment
analysis?, (c) how to capture char level ngram features for improving Amharic Sentiment Analysis in
Social media(e..g. Facebook) and (d) how can we evaluate the performance of the framework? The
rest of this paper is organized as follows: in the section 2, the related works are presented. The pro-
posed approaches including negation handling and capturing char level ngram features for Amharic
Sentiment Analysis is described in section 3. In section 4, results and discussions are presented.
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Conclusions and recommendations are drawn in section 5. In this section, we briefly present the
key related works. Asmi & Ishaya (2012) proposed an approach that can detect negation and con-
siders scope of negation relying on syntactic dependency for sentiment analysis. In (Amalia et al.,
2018), proposed rule based negation handling and its scope based on syntactic parsing of Indonesian
language for machine learning based sentiment analysis in twitter and the result of support vector
machine performs well as compared with other experiments. The F-Score on two Twitter data sets
is improved by 1.79% and 2.69% from the existing baseline without negation handling. In (Farooq
et al., 2017), develop negation scope handling strategies relying on the linguistic features of the lan-
guage. The accuracy of negation scope identification is 83.3% which outperforms very well above
the baseline. In (Diamantini et al., 2016), develops negation scope detection relying on dependency
parsing tree and semantic disambiguation technique and evaluated on integrated social networks in
real time. The performance of negation handling is outperforming with accuracy of 6% more than
the baseline. The work in (Heerschop et al., 2011) develops negation handling relying on wordbank
creation and document sentiment scoring for sentiment analysis and outperforms the human rating
by an increase precision with 1.17%. In (Enger et al., 2017), developed negation cue and scope
handling open source tool relying on dependency parser, negation cue(negation lists, prefix, suffix)
as input to machine learning(e.g. SVM) and its performance is slightly unchanged from the baseline.
2	METHODS
2.1	DATA SETS AND LEXICAL RESOURCES
This subsection describes the main data sets and lexical resources used for building and evaluating
the proposed framework.
2.2	FACEBOOK ANNOTATED AMHARIC NEWS COMMENTS
This dataset consists of 2705 sentence/phrase level sentiment annotated facebook news users’ com-
ments collected from the Government Office Affairs Communication (GOAC) between 2008 and
2010. News that received high view counters / frequent comments were selected as “hot topics” and
the associated comments labeled by professionals into either positive or negative sentiment. The
data sets for evaluating the performance of the negation handling and char level ngram based model
for Amharic sentiment analysis relying on sentence level sentiment scoring.
2.3	AMHARIC SENTIMENT LEXICONS
The Amharic sentiment lexicons includes manual(1000) (Gebremeskel, 2010),
SWN(13679) (Neshir Alemneh et al., 2019) and SOCAL(5683) (Neshir Alemneh et al., 2019) .
2.4	PROPOSED APPROACHES
The proposed framework includes the algorithm for negation handling and the sentiment scoring
strategies. The framework for negation handling and char level ngram based model is shown in
Figure 1 below.
Figure 1: Proposed Framework for Amharic Sentiment Classification
The stages in the framework are briefly described as follows:
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2.5	PREPROCESSING
We apply basic preprocessing on Amharic News Comments. These include normalization of Amharic
script symbols, tokenization, stop word removal, punctuation mark removal and so on. Amharic
writing system is expressed using only consonants. To handle the features of the language is very
challenging. We require conversion of Amharic scripts to consonant-vowel form. Particularly, be-
fore performing negation handling and stemming, the algorithm converts each Amharic word to its
consonant vowel form.
2.6	NEGATION DETECTION
We developed negation detection algorithm which re-turns true if a word contains negation cue either
PrefiX(6AA%^%, CA1^AR, 6%不人，引人乃，^h^, 61A, 6%不，6%), 6%以，RAA, hh^, ΛA7,
ΛAA, CAR) , suffix (中冗n,乃1A1%) or a word in negation lists. Before a word is
checked for negation clue, the Amharic word should be converted to consonant -
vowel form. The aforementioned Amharic prefixes and suffixes indicating negations
which are written in consonant- vowel form. Figure 2 represents the finite state
automata of Amharic morphological negation clues indicated by using prefix, suffix
or negation carrying word. An Amharic word is given as input to this finite state
automaton and the finite state automata (FSA) process the patterns of the word relying
on the regular expressions. If the word contains either of the prefixes, it will finish
processing on the state containing stem. If it contains one of the suffixes, it will finish
processing on the finish state or if it contains neither prefix nor suffix, it will finish
on the start state. And then check the word is in the negation list(NL). If any of these
is satisfied, it will return true, otherwise returns false.
Figure 2: State Automata for Amharic MorPhological Negation Clues
Assume the ith Amharic news comment, Ci in Amharic News Comments collection,
da, has preprocessed and finally, the comment is tokenized into lists. That is, Ci
= Wii,Wi2,,…,wj,,∙∙∙, WiN, ), where N is the number of tokens in ith comments,
Ci. Let the Amharic Sentiment Lexicon is denoted by Sa . As part of preprocessing,
we normalized not only all Amharic words in the Amharic News Comments but
also handling entries of Amharic Sentiment Lexicon by replacing varied alphabets of
the same sound with identical symbols. Moreover, a stemmer is applied for after
negation identification is completed. As Amharic is morphologically rich, to reduce
the mismatch of Amharic words during string comparison operation, we used stemming
for this purpose. Below is the Negation handling algorithm in 1.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
Input: wordorginal : input word
Output: I s_nag ation: returns True if there is negation clue, otherwise false
Sufix- r’C*?){(喟九仆|21八1力)}?$' prefix- r'(.*?){ r'(帖八^^工|仆八^^X2|61小片卬片2|^X2|61八|61小|61)|612|2片八|仆片刊ι
} word_CV_form-convert_to_CV(word_original) PrefiX_truegetsFalse SUffiX_truegetsFalse
if len(word)>3: then
L stem, suffix gets re.findall(negation_suffix, word_CV_form)[0] Wordgets stem
if len(suffix)>1: then
suffix_truegetsTrue	try: stem,prefix gets re.findall(negation_prefix, stem)[0][1], re.find-
all(negation_prefix, stem)[0] wordgets stem if llen(prefix)>1: then
L prefix_truegets True except: pass
if prefix_true: then
L Return prefix_true;
if suffix_true: then
L Retrun SUffiX_true
if suffix_true is False and prefix_true is False then
L Return False
algorithm 1: Amharic Negation Handling Algorithm
2.7	SENTIMENT SCORE CALCULATION
For each Amharic news comment, Ci , if each stemmed word wij is found in either
of the Amharic Sentiment lexicons (Manual, SOCAL, SWN), then the sentiment score
sij is retrieved. sij and its position index in the comment is stored. To compute the
sentiment of the comment, we apply positional weighting inversion if the comment
contains any negation clue. If negation clue is not found, the score of the word is
simply added. The sentiment Score computing algorithm is presented in 2.
Input: I nput: The ith Amharic News Comment, Ci of the comment Collection.
Output: Output: SentimentClass(either positive, negative or neutral/mixed)
Sa- Load Amharic Sentiment Lexicons from file Initialize parameters: ScoreI ndex - , SentiScore =
0, Negation = 0 Ci — [wi1,wi2,…，wij,…，wiN] = Preprocess(Ci), tokenize, normalize the Com-
ment
valuegets False
foreach wij in Ci do
if wij in Sa then
L Score_Index[j] — Sa [wij]
if DetectNegation(wij): then
L Negation- j
if Negation is not zero: then
foreach k in Score_Index.keys: do
if k < Negation and Negation is not Zero: then
L Senti_Score=k* Senti_Index[k] Sum=Sum+k
if k>Negation and Negation is not Zero: then
L N=len(Senti_Index.keys) Senti_Score=Negation*(N-k)* Senti_Index[k] Sum=Sum+(N-k)
if Negation is zero: then
N=len(Senti_Index.keys()) Senti_Score=sum(Senti_Index.Values)/N
if (Sum>0: then
L Senti_Score=Senti_Score/Sum
if Senti_Score>0: then
L Return “Positive”
if SentiScore<0: then
L Return “Negative”
if SentiScore==0: then
L Return “Neutral/Mixed/Unclassified”
algorithm 2: Amharic Sentiment Score Calculation Algorithm
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
As specified in algorithm 2, the sentiment class of the comment is decided based on
the value of the computed sentiment score. If the score is greater than zero, then the
sentiment of the comment is positive. If the score is less than zero, the sentiment of
the comment is negative. Otherwise, the sentiment of the comment is unclassified or
neutral or mixed.
2.8 CHAR LEVEL NGRAMS FOR AMHARIC SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
In this stage, we propose machine learning based Amharic Sentiment classification
that takes the character level ngrams tfidf features of Amharic text. Yet, Amharic
language lacks standard linguistic specific tools including dependency parser and part
of speech tagger to capture the scope of negation in Amharic text for sentiment
Analysis. Besides lexicon based negation handling approach, we try to enhance the
performance of Amharic sentiment Analysis relying on char level ngram tfidf feature
weights. As we hoped that there is flexibility to capture language dependent features
using character level ngram models. The usefulness of character aware language
models is well suited to apply for language identification, reducing of text feature
sparse dimensionality, helps to handle spelling errors, abbreviations, special characters
and so on [7]. These problems are particularly found in texts of social media where
texts data are too noisy and informal in nature to be processed using standard natural
language processing toolkit. That is why we propose character level ngram approaches
to reduce and address these issues for Amharic facebook news comments’ sentiment
analysis rather than word level ngram approaches. For example, the negation carrying
Amharic word “入AGf ⑪^”/ “I donot like him”/ has 2-gram character level features
includes:入XA-AG-Gf-f⑪-⑪^-^, 3-gram character level features are 入-XA-hA®-
AGf-Gf⑪-f⑪^-⑪^-^ and so on. In both cases, the negation marker/morpheme/
XA- is detected as feature of the negation word/"XAGf⑪^”/. Thus, We can identify
the negation word in Amharic text relying on character level ngram features and in
turn its scope will also be captured in the same manner from its surrounding character
ngram features that are assumed to enhance the performance of sentiment analysis.
For each Amharic facebook news comment, term frequency-inverse document frequency
(tfidf) weighted char level ngrams(e.g. bigrams and trigrams) features are extracted
and becomes input to ma-chine learning classifiers (e.g. logistic regression and Naive
Bayesian) for training and validation. Then, the two machine learning algorithms are
ensembled with lexicon based negation handling algorithm to predict the sentiment
class of Amharic comments. The usefulness of the combined (hybrid) framework is
measured using testing data set partitioned from annotated Amharic news comments.
The framework is implemented using python scikit learn library and the result and
discussion are presented in the following subsection.
3	RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we will evaluate the usefulness of the combination of Negation Han-
dling(NH) and character level ngram based models for sentiment classification of
Amharic facebook news comments. We call the combination of rule based NH and char
ngram based models as hybrid model for Amharic Sentiment classification. In nega-
tion handling approach, Amharic texts require basic text preprocessing (tokenization,
punctuation mark removal, normalizing Amharic script symbols, stopword removal,
spelling corrector, stemming, etc.). The effect of stemming and negation detection
technique on Amharic text is investigated to increase the accuracy of lexicon based
Amharic sentiment classification. However, to extract char level ngram features, pre-
processing tools including stemming, removal of punctuation marks, removal of stop
words, abbreviation expansion, etc. are not required. Thus, prior to char ngram based
sentiment classification, we partition the Annotated Amharic Facebook News Comment
corpus into training and testing sets. Logistic regression(LR) and Naive Bayesian(NB)
models are built relying on the char level bi-gram and tri-gram features of training
set. For Amharic Sentiment Classification, the accuracy of the combined models on
the test set are presented in Table 1.
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: The Accuracy (in percent) of Amharic Sentiment Classification Models
Approach	Accuracy(%)	
	Wordlevel (Baseline)	Char Level
Negation Handling(NH)	86.2	-
NB+LR	79.32	-83.75
Hybrid(NH+NB+LR)	95.27	98.0
Discussions: In Table 1, the usefulness of the proposed approach is tested relying on
their accuracies of classifying sentiment of Amharic facebook news comments. The
results in Table 1 show that negation handling algorithm outperforms very well (acc.
86.2%) than the performance of character level and word level based machine learning
models for classifying sentiment of Amharic texts. On the other hand, character level
ngram based classifier is more useful for classifying Amharic Sentiment than word level
ngram models (baseline). Finally, the hybrid model is obtained by combining negation
handling approach and char ngram models (NB+LR). This hybrid model outperforms
with accuracy of 98% than the other models and its combinations. Yet, it is quite
difficult to find why errors are generated in predicting sentiment category of Amharic
Facebook News Comment Text. On the basis of on-spot detection, the associated
reasons for most of wrongly predicted Amharic News Comments are presented as
follows: (a) we detect errors coming from professionals who annotated Amharic News
comments. For example, 'YU?4巾)ΛΛ^ λyx^d⅛ F尔小 Y九介小 n州m守不 F不⑪m'/ESAT
journalists are making the country to be disturbed/. The human annotator assigned
positive sentiment label to this comment. It should rather be assigned negative label.
To this end, the data should be revisited for correction. (b) we detect some comments
contains opinion words but the sentiment orientation of the whole comment is opposite
to the polarity of the opinion words in the comment. The reason for this is that the
comment is conditional sentence. It talks about hope rather than opinion. For example,
the Amharic news comments %⑪，方 V^⅛ ⅛7C ^7Λ∂ 化不A TG，⑪：'/It will be good if
you tell the truth/. In this comment, there are two positive words (e.g. good and
truth). However, the interpretation of the whole comment is talking about that they
told us fake news. Similarly, we detect some comments represents wishes that need
to be done. For example,'。片A 弋哨& He不)。十印QC λ7⅛^0^A7 λ7^APΛ7: '/We
need to see accomplished in practice that we heard in words/. This comment has no
any opinion words which helps the proposed approach to predict the sentiment of the
comment correctly. Further researches needs to carry out to reduce the source of errors
in predicting sentiment class of Amharic comments. Our recent findings is a good
starting point to improve the performance of Amharic sentiment analysis in facebook
news comments. Fine tuning char ngram features shows suitedness and flexible for
sentiment analysis of resource limited language (e.g. Amharic) than word level ngram
models.
4	CONCLUSIONS
In general, extensive linguistic resources are expensive to build sentiment analysis on the
less dominant languages (e.g. Amharic). To reduce this problem, we propose negation
handling approach and char ngram approach for Sentiment analysis of Amharic facebook
news comments. The proposed approaches are evaluated by measuring accuracy of
individual and their combinations for Amharic text sentiment classification. This work
reveals that combining rule based (negation handling approach) with machine learning
approach (char level ngram feature models) outperformed the best of the individual
approaches. This enhances performance of sentiment classification on Amharic news
comments on social media (e.g. Facebook). Some of the contributions of this work
are briefly summarized below:
•	The proposed negation handling approach for Amharic Sentiment Analysis out-
performs very well when we compared to the char ngram based machine
learning classifiers.
•	The approach for negation handling can be adapted to develop Amharic text
stemmer algorithm.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
•	We developed an approach that can be adapted to sentiment analysis of other
resource limited languages.
•	The char ngram based machine learning is promising that it reduces the demand
for linguistic resources for less dominant languages.
•	The approach can also be adapted to other tasks of natural language processing
including language identification, topic based text categorization, authorship
attributions, just to name a few.
•	The hybrid approach (NH + LR+NB) outperforms the best compared to the
individual approach for sentiment classification on Amharic facebook news
comment texts.
•	The code and related resources will be accessible publicly for research com-
munities.
So far, we have seen that the proposed approach still lacks accuracy for sentiment
analysis of a specific language (e.g. Amharic). The approach potentially does not
sufficiently capture the language specific features that help to identify the sentiment
class of Amharic news comment text in social media. Further work should be per-
formed to reduce the amount of errors in sentiment analysis of Amharic facebook news
comments. To address these issues, we may need to consider char ngram embedding
features from corpus of the same domain(e.g. Facebook news comments).
REFERENCES
Rizkiana Amalia, Moch Arif Bijaksana, and Dhinta Darmantoro. Negation handling in
sentiment classification using rule-based adapted from indonesian language syntactic
for indonesian text in twitter. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 971,
pp. 012039. IOP Publishing, 2018.
Amna Asmi and Tanko Ishaya. Negation identification and calculation in sentiment
analysis. In The second international conference on advances in information mining
and management, pp. 1--7, 2012.
Claudia Diamantini, Alex Mircoli, and Domenico Potena. A negation handling tech-
nique for sentiment analysis. In 2016 International Conference on Collaboration
Technologies and Systems (CTS), pp. 188--195. IEEE, 2016.
Martine Enger, Erik VelldaL and Lilja 0vrelid. An open-source tool for negation detec-
tion: a maximum-margin approach. In Proceedings of the Workshop Computational
Semantics Beyond Events and Roles, pp. 64--69, 2017.
Umar Farooq, Hasan Mansoor, Antoine Nongaillard, Yacine Ouzrout, and Muham-
mad Abdul Qadir. Negation handling in sentiment analysis at sentence level. JCP,
12(5):470--478, 2017.
S. Gebremeskel. Sentiment mining model for opinionated amharic texts. Unpublished
Masters Thesis and Department of Computer Science and Addis Ababa University
and Addis Ababa, 2010.
Bas Heerschop, Paul van Iterson, Alexander Hogenboom, Flavius Frasincar, and Uzay
Kaymak. Accounting for negation in sentiment analysis. In 11th Dutch-Belgian
Information Retrieval Workshop (DIR 2011), pp. 38--39, 2011.
Girma Neshir Alemneh, Andreas Rauber, and Solomon Atnafu. Dictionary Based
Amharic Sentiment Lexicon Generation, pp. 311--326. 08 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-
26629-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-26630-1_27.
7