Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Context Based Machine Translation with
Recurrent Neural Network for English-
Amharic Translation
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
The current approaches for machine translation usually require large set of par-
allel corpus in order to achieve fluency like in the case of neural machine trans-
lation (NMT), statistical machine translation (SMT) and example-based machine
translation (EBMT). The context awareness of phrase-based machine translation
(PBMT) approaches is also questionable. This research develops a system that
translates English text to Amharic text using a combination of context based ma-
chine translation (CBMT) and a recurrent neural network machine translation
(RNNMT). We built a bilingual dictionary for the CBMT system to use along with
a large target corpus. The RNNMT model has then been provided with the out-
put of the CBMT and a parallel corpus for training. Our combinational approach
on English-Amharic language pair yields a performance improvement over the
simple neural machine translation (NMT).
1	Introduction
Context based machine translation (CBMT) is a phrase-based machine translation (PBMT) approach
proposed by Miller et al. (2006). Unlike most PBMT approaches that rely on statistical occurrence
of the phrases, CBMT works on the contextual occurrence of the phrases. CBMT uses bilingual
dictionary as its main translator and produces phrases to be flooded into a large target corpus.
The CBMT approach addresses the problem of parallel corpus scarcity between language pairs.
The parallel corpus set for English-Amharic language pair, for instance, composes of the Bible, the
Ethiopian constitution and international documents. These sources use words specific to their do-
main and overlook phrases and words used by novels, news and similar literary documents. The
CBMT uses synonyms of words in place of rare words and rely on large target corpus and a bilin-
gual dictionary to help with data scarcity(Miller et al., 2006). It is not dependent on large parallel
corpus like most PBMT such as the statistical machine translation (SMT)(Brown et al., 1990) and
the example-based machine translation EBMT(Gangadharaiah, 2011). The CBMT, however, fails
in fluently translating texts compared to the neural machine translation (NMT).
The NMT learns the pattern of humans’ translation using human translated parallel corpus. Its trans-
lations are more fluent and accurate than all the rest so far when evaluated individually (Popovic,
2017). However, NMT struggles to translate properly rare words and words not commonly used(Wu
et al., 2016). In addition, NMT requires large parallel corpus for training.
The aim of this research is to build a system by combining the CBMT with the NMT for English
to Amharic translation. The combination of PBMT and NMT is the future and most promising
than the individual approaches themselves (Popovic, 2017). CBMT’s ability to address rare words
and the NMT’s ability to produce fluent translation along with their context awareness makes them
complementary couple.
The combination is done by providing the NMT with two inputs, one from the source language and
the other from the output of the CBMT to produces the final target sentence. In this paper, we show
that this approach utilizes the strength of each method to achieve a significant translation perfor-
mance improvement over simple NMT. The improvement is mostly dependent on the performance
of the CBMT and mostly on the bilingual dictionary of the CBMT.
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2	Related Works
PBMT approaches are mostly used to translate English to Amharic as in the case of Gasser
(2012),Tadesse & Mekuria (2000), Teshome (2000), Besacier et al. (2000), Zewgneh (2017) and
Taye et al. (2015) . Below we summarize the researches with most significance to ours.
The SMT approach takes a parallel corpus as an input and it selects the most frequent target phrase
based on statistical analysis for each searched source phrase (Brown et al., 1990). The SMT ap-
proach applied to the English-Amharic pair has produced 18.74 % BLEU score (Tadesse & Mekuria,
2000). The SMT has good accuracy in translating all the words in a sentence but it is not fluent (Ola-
dosu et al., 2016).
Hybrid of SMT and rule based machine translation (RBMT) translates and orders the source text
based on the grammar rules of the target language and sends it to the SMT for final transla-
tion(Yulianti et al., 2011)(Labaka et al., 2014). The hybrid approach for English-Amharic pair has
achieved a 15% improvement over SMT on simple sentence and 20% improvement for complex
sentence(Zewgneh, 2017). Hybrid of RBMT and SMT gets fluency from RBMT and accuracy from
SMT but for longer sentences, the reordering fails(Oladosu et al., 2016).
The CBMT approach has been implemented for the language pair Spanish-English. In CBMT, the
source phrases are translated using bilingual dictionary and flooded to target corpus. It has achieved
64.62% BLEU score for the researchers’ dataset(Miller et al., 2006). The CBMT outperforms SMT
in accuracy and fluency but translation of phrases with words not in the bilingual dictionary is weak
(Miller et al., 2006).
The NMT has been researched by different groups and here the research by Googles’ researchers
on the language pair English-French is presented. The NMT model is trained using parallel corpus.
The source sentence is encoded as a vector and then decoded with the help of an attention model.
Googles’ NMT model has achieved 38.95% BLEU score(Wu et al., 2016). The NMT has accuracy
and fluency but it fails to translate the whole sentence and also fails to perform well with rare
words(Wu et al., 2016). To solve this using sub-word units has been suggested (Sennrich et al.,
2016) but Amharic has unique treats like ”Tebko-lalto”, one word with two different meanings,
which can only be addressed by using context.
The NMT has been modified to translate low resourced languages. One approach uses universal
lexical representation (ULR) were a word is represented using universal word embeddings. This
benefits low resource languages which have semantic similarity with high resourced languages (Gu
et al., 2018). This achieved 5% BLEU score improvement over normal NMT. However, most south-
ern Semitic languages like Amharic do not have a strong semantic relative with large resource.
NMT has also been modified to work with monolingual corpus instead of parallel corpus using
cross-lingual word embedding(Artetxe et al., 2017). Such an approach achieved a 15.56% BLEU
score which was less that the semi-supervised and supervised which achieved 21.81% BLEU score
and 20.48% BLEU score respectively.
Combination of NMT and PBMT which takes the output of SMT (a PBMT) and the source sentence
to train the NMT model has been used for the language pair English-German. It has achieved 2
BLEU points over basic NMT and PBMT(Niehues et al., 2016). Combination of NMT and PBMT
which takes three inputs; output of basic NMT, output of SMT and output of Hierarchical PBMT
(HPBMT) of SMT has been implemented for English-Chinese language pair. It achieved 6 BLEU
points over basic NMT and 5.3 BLEU points over HPBMT(Zhang et al., 2017). The combination
of PBMT and NMT performs better (Popovic, 2017) in terms of accuracy and fluency but it is
dependent on the performance of the chosen PBMT approach.
3	Methodology
In this research, we have selected CBMT and NMT to form a combinational system. This approach
addresses the limitation of context unawareness of some PBMT approaches like SMT and the need
for large parallel corpus of simple NMT. In our approach, the source sentence in English and the
translation output of the CBMT in Amharic has been fed to the NMT’s encoder-decoder model as
shown in Figure 1. The NMT model then produces the final Amharic translation.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: The proposed combination method
The combination of the CBMT and the NMT follows the mixed approach proposed by Niehues et al.
(2016). Their mixed approach feeds the NMT with the source sentence and the output of the PBMT.
The research by Zhang et al. (2017) also supports this way of combining different systems.
3.1	CBMT system
The CBMT outperforms RBMT, SMT and EBMT when it comes to languages with less parallel
corpora(Miller et al., 2006). It uses a bilingual dictionary, a large target corpus and smaller source
corpus, which is optional. In the context based machine translation, there are different components
working together to produce the translation. Figure 2 shows the flow of data in the different compo-
nents of the CBMT.
Figure 2: Overview of the CBMT system
The source sentence is converted into N-gram phrases and then it is translated using bilingual dic-
tionary. CBMT’s performance is mostly dependent on the efficiency of the dictionary. We have
manually built a phrase based dictionary aided by Google translate. A synonym finder helps the
dictionary’s search using WordNet(Soergel, 1998). WordNet is a library with large lexical database
of English words. It provides synonyms of the English words whose Amharic translations are not in
dictionary. In this paper, a maximum of four N-grams has been used. Most phrases of English that
are translated to a single word in Amharic have a length of four or less words.
For example the English phrase ”everyone who calls on the name of the lord will be saved” has
the translations in Output 1 using our dictionary.
'everyone1,,叮Wm严 ∏0>>" J- [1 eweryone' h 'λa∕7⅛7⅛* ɪ],
[lwho∖ '呷曰]Jr
[rcaiis∖ '仪[,calls'p 'em'Jil [rcaiis∖ i∣w∣⅛B-i]]∣,
IUtJn) M]]∙
[rnamβr r ,nrf']r ['natι⅛',	r], [, name, r 5r严'],['name', '⅛⅛?1VL']]ll
L, of ij 1r JL
['Lord' r '廿' ]ι. [,Lord∖ ,cw"]r [ ,Lc⅛rd∖ ∙j⅛卢不中], ['Lord', l,m^,]p
'Lord' ,γii>⅛"j' i, [ 'Lord½ ,¾j∏⅞, ]j [pLαrd∖ FI›e∣L [ 'Lord‰
,Lord∖ 'r⅛Λ,]r ['Lord∖ iιi^i,h [i∣Lorcl', ,r⅛≠7t'], ['Lord', iι⅛^τ>>]j
* Lord S F /”]],
['wiιιrr 'χ.≠⅛']Jf
['will be saved∖ *j⅛∙*⅛t']]j
∣[rt>e∖ 'Eg」j,
[i saved ∖ ∙j⅛*mG]. [ i saved', MQj„再・].[b saved'j ''g 标不》”].["saved1 j ,½⅝j⅛']p
,save⅛∖ ,^⅛-i⅛1 ], [1 saveds, iΛ>¾⅛!-l]r [ lsa⅛⅛d,r r∙⅜∙⅛^ftW], [1 saved,,1	,]r
,saved∖ IEMA■,]]]
Output 1: The translated output of the N-grams
These translations have been combined into sentences in the same order as the source sentence.
Then each sentence is converted into N-grams of variable length. The maximum flooded N-grams
length is Ien(Ngram) + ι if Ien(Ngram) ≥4 else it is equal to Ien(Ngram). This provides a good
variable range to capture neighboring words in a single N-gram.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Output 2 shows sentences formed using the translations in Output 1. The N-grams to be flooded are
formed by sliding one word from left to right through the combined sentence.
二止i⅛严 nα> T露严不口严 工--总特号擀iΛ'ι>Λ再f⅛tπ∙ TH尹矛U* FTl声，此后弋总仁»翔严 在α>『F.nd一 nT 久卜上处/油可二
'M产在叱 产” ITW ∩7o ∏J∣->片却涵『'"共Td户¥仃F5 TL寸芦势M∙∖rl卜曲Tci尹斗∩Γ*	JS^∣Λ<,
廿得ri⅞m<f. n*工土心於y以UJmh I⅝mg n严 ■卢/珏科皿WJ
Output 2: The translated output combined into sentence
Output 3 shows the N-grams for the translated sentences shown in Output 2.
[1 u∙⅛ft ʤ TWF,羊 行严I *s⅛* rtɪ* T气mɪr-相产L 2% TW尸羊 行严■■. i∣ħΛ ιrσ7,m⅛. rtJtti ],
Ir由由餐式贯手 H尸 T T JF rf⅛D- >T.尸子 △尸 邛.1力B∙ EME小尸 JI中L ,ΛtD∙ VOH面心小尸
ι⅛#>1 lTriF*4ζ 件产 3卢L "τ⅛*不 靠产 Lt#7' W"m心 力产 τs)i,f ∣*^im 件严 fi^,]r
「TW尸千 hP≡ 七# 洋J⅛⅛AO r ' TrfJP≠ H尸 ndf j⅛J⅛-*7⅛fΓ*	brdlrf11rf∙. ⅛Pb 1# 的J⅛⅛A1Γ∖ 1 L"TLffHf-占尸 ITmAU
HF -沙 易却：曲?・,・门尸 F13τ7 E⅜⅜l⅛v ∣]]
Output 3: The N-grams for the translated sentences
The flooder is then responsible for searching the translated phrases in the target corpus and finding
the longest N-gram match. For each phrase to be flooded, it selects a phrase in the target corpus
with the most translated words and least in-between words amongst the words matched. The flooder
produces the result in Output 4 with the Book of Romans as the target corpus to be flooded.
[[[[ ri⅛o*rjtfMΛ τj,Λtf',r ∙ML,τA 5jΓγjrVT^re⅛rr3* L⅛~Z,√MrftA≠rj,tfi⅛Sr? ⅛⅛4J,,'M*'UN
i1Γ≠l, tΛJSrr l6fcFr 'zʌ ' iT∖ ，尸7⅛g∙Tl ，明+尸 7[∙rf■严 rr ,Γ¾ħΛ*jir/W*Ir WF% 北	Jjr
[「3' ，W* ,T1*Γ∙M浒Is rj⅛>≡rJz [rn^tf WkL 一尸尸，'r¾τM'JrrHZ，jm T-WJ],
L'5', 5⅞rH ∙9∖	[∙m* 1厘，Ifn/，r⅛MΛ ，昴j⅜¾∕JJJ}
Output 4: Final output of flooder for single flooded file
The N-gram connector combines the flooded text to find the longest overlap of the translated target
text. The overlapping system favors those with the least number of not searched words found in
between the searched N-grams when calculating the overlap. Output 5 shows the final outcome of
the N-gram connector.
The system selects the maximum or longest overlapping phrases from the combiner and merges
them to form the final target sentence. So finally, the translation for the example English phrase
”everyone who calls on the name of the lord will be saved” is」中'，门尸产 3 / M，心二：「.
3.2	NMT system
In this paper, we have used RNN (recurrent neural networks) for the NMT. In RNN, the output is fed
back to the neuron to learn from both the fresh input and its previous output. This improves RNN’s
performance because it learns from its errors while training.
The neural cell used is the LSTM (long short-term memory), introduced by Hochreiter & Schmid-
huber (1997). We have used LSTM cells for both the encoding and decoding of the sentences. For
the decoding, a greedy algorithm has been used. The algorithm selects the first fit word that has
the highest probability of occurrence. Probability refers to the probability of being translated and
appearing next to the word before itself.
The system has an attention layer between the encoder layer and the decoder layer. We have used the
Luong attention model(Luong et al., 2015). Equation 1 through Equation 4 shows Luong attention
model’s computation.
αts
exp(score(ht, hs))
-----------------------[Attention Weights]
exp(score(ht, hs0))
s0=1
(1)
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
∙j-F≠⅛i*Jj mlr-TE,rft⅛lJJzff *r⅛≠7%“严 ∖Γr⅞⅛77j7f77Σ≠T%'心EJrFrtGl 'M∙∖]
,j⅛⅛⅛P]l∕Lrχf＞了. 飞尸3 Frj‰⅛∙, IIML ∙j⅛⅝⅛LL 广。产7』， "尸'，，f∣⅛L 'M'Jx⅛⅝-ld产力 I
Output 5: Final Output of N-gram connector
Ct = Eatshs	[Context vector]	(2)
s
at = f(ct, ht) = tanh(Wc[ct : ht])	[Attention Vector]	(3)
score(ht, hs) = hTWhs [Luong's multiplicative style]	(4)
The score function, calculated using Equation 4, is used to compare the output of the decoder (ht)
with the output of the encoder (hs) in order to find the attention weight calculated using Equation 1.
The Attention weights (alphats) are then used for the context vector(ct) calculated by Equation 2.
This context vector as well as the output of the decoder is then used to produce the final output of
the decoder using Equation 3.
3.3	Combination of CBMT and NMT
To combine the two systems, we have made the NMT model to accept two inputs. We have used the
proposed method of combining PBMT with NMT accepting two source inputs by Zoph & Knight
(2016). According to Zoph & Knight (2016), having two inputs, where one is the source sentence
and the other a translation of the source to another language different from the target, helps the NMT
produce a better result.
The source sentence and the sentence translated using the CBMT are encoded separately and are
given to the attention layer. The attention layer focuses on the two inputs at the same time rather
than separately. There is a single decoder, which receives the output of the attention layer and
provides the final translation.
Based on the paper ZoPh & Knight (2016), the final outputs of the encoders (ht) are concatenated
and a linear transformation is applied to the concatenated output which is activated by tanh using
Equation 5. On the other hand, the final states (ct) are simply added as shown by Equation 6. In
the attention, the different context vectors are calculated separately and concatenated to produce the
final output of the attention vector based on the Luong attention mechanism(Luong et al., 2015)
using Equation 7.
h = tanh(Wc[h1 ; h2])	(5)
c = c1 + c2	(6)
ht = tanh(wc[ht; c1; c2]	(7)
4	Experiment S etup
We evaluate the proposed approach for the language pair English-Amharic using the same training
parameters for both the basic NMT and the combinational system. The encoder-decoder setup has
1024 LSTM cells or hidden units with 1024 word embedding and the data has been trained for 100
epochs.
4.1	Corpus Used
This research uses the new International Version Bible because both the Amharic and English ver-
sions are translated from the same Dead Sea scrolls. This makes it more accurately parallel than
other versions of the Bible translation.
The whole New Testament of the Bible has been used as a corpus providing a total of 8603 phrases
and sentences. We have used two books of the Bible, Paul’s letter to the Romans (Romans) and the
Gospel according to Mark (Mark), as a test set.
Google translate has been used as the main agent of translation for the manually built bilingual
dictionary used by the CBMT. 77% of the total 6,793 vocabulary words have been translated using
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Google. In addition to Google translate; we have done a manual translation for 1,426 vocabulary
words in the book of Romans and other 150 vocabulary words using the Bible.
Manual translation here refers to the translation of each word using every entry it has in the Bible
by a human. Figure 5 shows the outcome of such translation for the word Acknowledge. Manual
translation helps to address the variations in Amharic translated words caused by gender (female or
male), plural form and the different persons (first, second and third persons). English words do also
have different Amharic translations based on their context as shown in Figure 3. Acknowledge has
been translated into four main stem words : ∙	: s." λ"l , "l： /
己 UkrlOWledg 2 ∣⅛0>泰通			h∏l>	MfihtzMAiF				
Figure 3: Manual translation result of the word acknowledge
4.1.1	Dataset
We have fed the same dataset to all systems with minor variations. In the CBMT, we have used the
book of Mark and the book of Romans as a test set. The flooded texts for the book of Romans were
the book of Romans itself and Paulian epistles without Romans. The flooded texts for the book of
Mark were the book of Mark itself and the gospels without Mark. The books have been flooded to
themselves in order to evaluate the performance of the CBMT when the searched text is found in the
flooded text and also to see the impact of the bilingual dictionary on the CBMT.
The combinational system has two different test sets and different models. The first test set has the
output of the CBMT and the source sentence as an input for the NMT. The second test set gives the
original target text and the source sentence as an input to the NMT models and we have called it the
ideal approach. This was done so to see the impact of the CBMT output and the errors introduced
by the CBMT on the combinational system.
In the basic NMT and combinational system, similar dataset as the CBMT is used. We have used
Paulian epistle without Romans to train a basic NMT model and the combinational model. Then
we have tested the model using the book of Romans as the test or holdout set. We have used 10-
fold cross validation(Dietterich, 1998) to train and test the basic NMT model and the combinational
model with Romans. In a similar manner, we have used 10-fold cross validation(Dietterich, 1998) to
train the basic NMT model and the combinational model with the book of Mark. We have also used
holdout validation(Raschka, 2018) with a random 80% training and 20% test data split alongside the
10-fold cross validation for both Mark and Romans to obtain a more general representation of the
results.
5	EVALUATION METHOD
We have measured the translation performance based on the fullness of the translation, whether the
system translates all words; context awareness, whether the translation is true to the context and
Coherence, whether the translated sentence has a smooth flow of words in terms of syntax.
In this research, the BLEU score is the chosen method of evaluation. It answers all the above-
enlisted criteria. The quality of translation is measured by the correspondence between a machine’s
output and that ofa human(Kishore et al., 2002). BLEU score is defined in the range between 0 and
1 (or in percentage between 0 and 100) where 1 is a perfect match with the reference and 0 is for no
words matched.
6	RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section provides the results obtained along with a brief explanation of the factors and the com-
ponents.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
6.1	CBMT Result and Discussion
The system has been tested using a custom-made dictionary using Google translate and manual
translation. We have generated the vocabulary of the dictionary from the English version of the NIV
Bible. Table 1 depicts the CBMT test results obtained, using BLEU score evaluation method. We
Table 1: Results for the CBMT
	Flooded Data	Test data	BLEU score
丁	Paulian epistle without Romans	Romans	2791
ɪ	Romans	Romans	70:46
丁	Mark	Mark	2198
丁	Gospels without Mark	Mark	21.43	—
have implemented manual translation for the book of Romans on about 80% of its total vocabulary.
Hence, it has a better performance yield than the book of Mark, whose translation was solely de-
pendent on Google translate. This is so both when they are flooded to the text that contained them
(by 48%) and when they are flooded to the text without them (by 6%). However, the translation of
Romans does not produce a 100% as would be expected when it is part of the flooded document.
This is mainly because the system selects the overlapping N-gram based on the number of words
matched, two consecutive phrases that may have a high overlap but which are not the correct ones
may be selected.
6.2	NMT Result and Discussion
The NMT test results obtained using BLEU score evaluation method are depicted in Table 2. The
Table 2: Results for the NMT
	Training input Data	Test data	Validation	BLEU score
丁	Paulian epistle without Romans	Romans	Holdout	1024
ɪ	Romans	Romans	10-fold-	1195
丁	Mark	Mark	10-fold	1242
亏	Romans	Romans	Holdout	728
ɪ	Mark	Mark	Holdout	10.12 —
test result obtained from Mark was better than that from Romans by an average of 1.62%. Although
insignificant difference, it attributes to Marks’ writing having similar words unlike the diverse word
selection in Romans(Clay, 2018).
6.3	CBMT and NMT Combination Result and Discussion
There are two test cases for this section. In the first case, we have given the NMT the source sentence
and the output of the CBMT as an input per the proposed methodology. Table 3 shows the results
obtained from such a setup. In the second case, we have given the NMT the English source sentence
Table 3: Results for the combination of NMT and CBMT
	Training input Data	Test data	Validation	BLEU score
丁	Paulian epistle without Romans	CBMT output Romans	Holdout	1155
F	Romans	CBMT output Romans	10-fold-	14:07
丁	Mark	CBMT output Mark	10-fold	1236
亏	Romans	CBMT output Romans	Holdout	13:84
ɪ	Mark	CBMT output Mark	Holdout	12.73 —
and the original Amharic as an input creating an ideal system. The test results obtained using BLEU
score evaluation method, are depicted in Table 4 for the ideal combinational system. In the first case,
when the CBMT output is used as an input to the NMT, the Book of Romans performed better than
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 4: Ideal case Results for the combination of NMT and CBMT
	Training input Data	Test data	Validation	BLEU score
丁	Paulian epistle without Romans	original AmhariC Romans	Holdout	1163
F	Romans	original Amharic Romans	10-fold-	18:46
丁	Mark	original Amharic Mark	10-fold	17:41
亏	Romans	original Amharic Romans	Holdout	2574
ɪ	Mark	original Amharic Mark	Holdout	25.52 —
the book of Mark by 1.71%. The CBMT output of Romans is better than that by the book of Mark
and its impact has propagated to the combinational system. In the ideal case scenario the results is
more or less the same. The result for the book of Romans was better than the book of Mark by only
0.63%.
6.4	Discussion of all Results
The average of the results obtained from the systems have been calculated and shown in Tables 5
for comparison. The ideal combinational system, which takes the original target Amharic text as the
Table 5: Summary of all results
System	Dataset	BLEU score
CBMT	book of Romans	2791
	book of Mark	2143
simple NMT	book of Romans	961
	book of Mark	1127
Combinational system with CBMT output	book of Romans	1395
	book of Mark	1254
Combinational system with original text (ideal)	book of Romans	221
	book of Mark	21.46	—
second input, has performed better on average with 11.34 BLEU score gain over the NMT. The ideal
system, however, did not outperform the CBMT on average but produced results in the same range.
The combinational system with CBMT output given as the second input for the NMT, achieves 2.805
BLEU score point over the simple NMT. The CBMT without being provided the target flooded data
has performed better by 14.23 BLEU points over the simple NMT.
7	CONCLUSION
The research set out to find a combinational system with components that complement each other
when translating a document from English to Amharic. We have proposed the CBMT and the NMT
as the complementing pair in terms of parallel data size, accuracy, context awareness with translation
and coherence.
The CBMT system performed better than the basic NMT and the combinational system given the
same size of data. However, the ideal combination of the CBMT and NMT has a BLEU score in
the range of the CBMT while outperforming the simple NMT by 11.34 BLEU points. For the book
of Mark whose writing resembles the other Gospels, the ideal combination outperformed all. This
entails that with smaller increase in parallel corpus for the NMT of the ideal system will outperform
both individual systems. The output from the CBMT has a great impact on the performance of the
combinational systems as seen by the performance of the proposed combinational system compared
to the ideal system. The proposed combinational system still has outperformed the basic NMT by
2.805 BLEU score points in spite of the errors introduced by the CBMT.
Therefore, a CBMT with a well-built bilingual dictionary that produces a close to ideal output along
with a well-trained NMT with sufficient data makes a fluent combinational system that outperforms
a simple NMT and a basic CBMT system. In conclusion, the study suggests the combinational
system for translation of English to Amharic language.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
References
Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre, and Kyunghyun Cho. Unsupervised neural machine
translation. CoRR, abs/1710.11041, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.11041.
Laurent Besacier, Michael Melese, and Million Meshesha. Amharic speech recognition for speech
translation in tourism domain. 2000.
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Jelinek,
John D. Lafferty, Robert L. Mercer, , and Paul S. Roossin. A statistical approach to machine
translation. Computational Linguistics Volume 16 Number 2, 1990.
Cholee Clay.	Comparing the gospels:	Matthew, mark, luke, and
john, 2018.	URL https://owlcation.com/humanities/
Comparing-the-Gospels-Matthew-Mark-Luke-and-John.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Approximate statistical tests for comparing supervised classification learning
algorithms. Neural computation, 1998.
Rashmi Gangadharaiah. Coping with data sparsity in example based machine translation. 2011.
Michael Gasser. Toward a rule-based system for english -amharic translation. 2012.
Jiatao Gu, Hany Hassan, Jacob Devlin, and Victor O. K. Li. Universal neural machine translation
for extremely low resource languages. CoRR, abs/1802.05368, 2018. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/1802.05368.
SePP Hochreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. 9:1735-80, 12 1997.
Papineni Kishore, Roukos Salim, Ward Todd, and Zhu Wei-Jing. Blue: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, PP. 311-318, 2002.
Gorka Labaka, Cristina EsPaa-Bonet, Llus Mrquez i Villodre, and KePa Sarasola. A hybrid machine
translation architecture guided by syntax. machine translation, 2014.
Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and ChristoPher D. Manning. Effective aPProaches to attention-
based neural machine tr anslation. cs.CL, 2015.
David Miller, Jaime Carbonell, Steve Klein, Mike Steinbaum, and Tomer Grassiany. Context-based
machine translation. The Association for Machine Translation of the Americas (AMTA-2006),
2006.
ThanhLe Ha Jan Niehues, Eunah Cho, and AlexWaibel. Pre-translation for neural machine transla-
tion. 2016.
John Oladosu, AdebimPe Esan, Ibrahim Adeyanju, Benjamin Adegoke, Olatayo Olaniyan, and Bo-
laji Omodunbi. APProaches to machine translation: A review. FUOYE Journal of Engineering
and Technology, 1:120-126, 09 2016.
Maja PoPovic. ComParing language related issues for nmt and Pbmt between german and english.
The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics No. 108, 2017, pp. 20922, 2017.
Sebastian Raschka. Model evaluation, model selection, and algorithm selection in machine learning,
2018.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), PP. 1715-1725, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association
for ComPutational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1162. URL https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/P16-1162.
Dagobert Soergel. Wordnet. an electronic lexical database. 10 1998.
Ambaye Tadesse and Yared Mekuria. English to amharic machine translation using smt. Master’s
thesis, Addis Ababa University, 2000.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Girma Taye, Mulu Gebreegziabher, Laurent Besacier, and Dereje Teferi. Phoneme based english-
amharic statistical machine translation. AFRICON 2015, pp. 1-5, 2015.
Eleni Teshome. Bidirectional english-amharic machine translation: An experiment using con-
strained corpus. Master’s thesis, Addis Ababa University, 2000.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin John-
son, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa,
Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa,
Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Gregory S. Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s
neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1609.08144, 2016.
Evi Yulianti, Indra Budi, Achmad N. Hidayanto, Hisar M. Manurung, and Mirna Adriani. Devel-
oping indonesian-english hybrid machine translation system. 2011 International Conference on
Advanced Computer Science and Information Systems, 2011.
Samrawit Zewgneh. English-amharic document translation using hybrid approach. Master’s thesis,
Addis Ababa University, 2017.
Jiajun Zhang, Long Zhou, Wenpeng Hu, and Chengqing Zong. Neural system combination for
machine translation. In ACL, 2017.
Barret Zoph and Kevin Knight. Multi-source neural translation. cs.CL, 2016.
10