Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Deceptive Opponent Modeling with Proactive
Network Interdiction for Stochastic Goal
Recognition Control
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Goal recognition based on the observations of the behaviors collected online has
been used to model some potential applications. Newly formulated problem of
goal recognition design aims at facilitating the online goal recognition process by
performing offline redesign of the underlying environment with hard action re-
moval. In this paper, we propose the stochastic goal recognition control (S-GRC)
problem with two main stages: (1) deceptive opponent modeling based on maxi-
mum entropy regularized Markov decision processes (MDPs) and (2) goal recog-
nition control under proactively static interdiction. For the purpose of evaluation,
we propose to use the worst case distinctiveness (wcd) as a measure of the non-
distinctive path without revealing the true goals, the task of S-GRC is to interdict
a set of actions that improve or reduce the wcd. We empirically demonstrate that
our proposed approach control the goal recognition process based on opponent’s
deceptive behavior.
1 Introduction
Goal recognition (GR), also called intention recognition, is the task of inferring the goals ofan agent
according to the observed actions or states collected online (Sadri, 2011), which enables humans or
agents to make proactive response plans. Goal recognition design (GRD) is to deliberately redesign
the environment for improved online goal recognition ability (Keren et al., 2014), which includes
two key models, the first measures how efficiently and effectively the online goal recognition system
performs in a given setting, the second optimizes the goal recognition setting via redesign (Keren
et al., 2019). Goal recognition control (GRC) aims at soft action interdiction under bounded re-
source by adding cost compared to the hard action removal of GRD (Luo et al., 2019), in which
the interdiction can be proactively static inhibition or online dynamic block by allocating security
resources to protect goals against the attacker.
In fact, under complex environment (both adversarial and cooperative), the information of an op-
ponent’s goals are asymmetric and can not be obtained through communication (Le Guillarme,
2016). Most recent advancements in GR utilize planning recognition as planning (PRAP) (Ramirez
& Geffner, 2009), generative game-theoretic frameworks (Ang et al., 2017), and goal recognition as
planning (GRAP) (Pereira et al., 2019). There are three key assumptions widely used: (1) agents
performs optimal plans to real the goals; (2) the environment is fully observable, that is the states
and actions of the agents are observable; and (3) the agent’s actions are deterministic. However,
these existing frameworks seldom address the deceptive behaviors of actively misleading the goal
recognition process. We will relax the first and third assumptions to handle non-optimal agents and
stochastic actions. Such as one game-theoretic approach provided with a unified treatment of both
threat assessment and response planning in (Guillarme et al., 2017), after evaluating the threat, the
defender will allocate road barrier or patrolling force to protect critical infrastructure, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
In order to identify the goals and improve security, we employ opponent modeling to deal with the
non-stationary strategies stemming from deception, in which maximum entropy regularized Markov
decision process (MDP) is utilized to shape the multi-modal adversarial strategies (Shen & How,
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: Illustration of critical infrastructure protection (CIP) (Guillarme et al., 2017): the defender
can perform proactive road network interdiction to accelerate the opponent’s goal recognition even
with possible deceptive behaviors.
2019). After finding the maximal non-distinctive agent path, we are seeking some optimal modifi-
cations (e.g., interdiction to block or inhibit action) to accelerate the online goal recognition.
In this work, we propose the stochastic goal recognition design (S-GRC) problem with deceptive
opponent modeling and proactive network interdiction: the opponent’s deceptive policy is modeled
as one soft multi-criteria decision policy with one tunable parameter to balance goal achievement
and deception preference; and the primary objective is offline redesigning the environment by soft
action interdiction to control online GR.
To validate the model, we evaluate our approach in two different environment representations: ran-
dom generated connected graph and real road network. Our experiments demonstrate that (1) de-
ceptive opponent modeling with entropy regularization make it robust to multi-modal stochastic be-
haviors; (2) soft decision policy based stochastic goal recognition design model for action removal
bridge the gap between observation and decision making.
2	Related Work
2.1	Goal Recognition and Design
Goal Recognition (GR): The ability of inferring the goals of others can assist us to reason about
what they are doing, why they are doing it, and what they will do next (Sukthankar et al., 2014). The
recognition setting can be generally be divided into keyhole, where the agent is unaware of being
observed and recognized as if the agent is looking through a keyhole; adversarial, where the agent
is actively hostile to the observations of the actions and the inference of the goals; and intended,
where the agent wants to convey the goal to be understood and helps the recognizer to detect the
objective (Keren et al., 2019). In this work, we focus on the adversarial setting, where the agent
would hide the goal and attempt to thwart the recognition process by deception. GR is strongly
related to the topic of privacy-preserving and explainable planning (Keren et al., 2016; Chakraborti
et al., 2019; Kulkarni et al.).
Goal Recognition Design (GRD): The GRD problems contains two models: one goal recogni-
tion setting analyzed environments, acting agent (attacker), and recognition system (recognizer, ob-
server); one design model of possible ways to change the environment (Keren et al., 2019). The
environment will induce a set of possible behaviors for the attacker, GRD can be divided into
deterministic GRD (Keren et al., 2019), stochastic GRD (S-GRD) (Wayllace et al., 2018; Wayl-
lace, 2019), GRD for Agents with partial knowledge (GRD-APK) (Sarah et al., 2019), and game-
theoretic GRD (Ang et al., 2017; Masters & Sardina, 2017). Also, many design measures have been
employed, such as action removal (AR), action sensor refinement (SAR), and action conditioning
(AC) (Keren et al., 2018; Wayllace et al., 2018).
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2.2	Opponent Modeling and Network Interdiction
Deceptive Opponent Modeling: Opponent modeling has been employed to reason the non-
stationary strategies of autonomous agents (Albrecht & Stone, 2018; Papoudakis et al., 2019). De-
ception involves combination of hiding the truth and showing the false (Masters & Sardina, 2017),
which articulated three distinct strategies in each case: dissimulation (masking, repackaging, and
dazzling), simulation (mimicking, inventing, and decoying) (Ettinger & Jehiel, 2010). As for de-
ceptive path planning, game-theoretic method (Root, 2005) and model based (Masters & Sardina,
2017) method have been investigated.
Network Interdiction: In recent researches, interdiction has been used to counter the attacker’s be-
havior, MDP interdiction (Panda & Vorobeychik, 2017), plan interdiction (Vorobeychik & Pritchard,
2018), and network interdiction (Xu et al.) show one promising research thread of Observe-Orient-
Decide-Act (OODA).
2.3	Regularized MDPs
Most sequential decision-making problems can be described as MDP based reinforcement learning
problems or stochastic game problems. Regularization for MDPs can be divided into temporal
regularization problems in temporal space (Thodoroff et al., 2018), spatial regularization in feature
or state space (Farahmand, 2011; Harrigan), and entropy or information regularization in policy
space (Neu et al., 2017; Geist et al., 2019; Belousov & Peters, 2019). Regularized reinforcement
learning focuses on the smoothness and sparsity of the value function (Farahmand, 2011), acquiring
of diverse robot skills (Haarnoja, 2018), and sparsity and multi-modality of the optimal policy (Lee
et al., 2019). Regularized stochastic game employees various entropy constraints to balance or
control behavior (Grau-Moya et al., 2018; Savas et al., 2019; Ahmadi et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2019).
3	Stochastic Goal Recognition Control
The goal recognition control (GRC) problems try to balance the intended and adversarial goal recog-
nition process under network interdiction (Luo et al., 2019), which extends to assume that the agent
can choose to reveal or obfuscate (Kulkarni et al., 2019b;a), share or hide (Strouse et al., 2018)
the goals. In this paper, we focus on stochastic GRC (S-GRC) under adversarial, cooperative, and
non-stationary environment. The framework of our proposed approach is illustrated in Figure 3.
We embed deceptive opponent modeling and proactive network interdiction into the OODA cycle as
two modules, which could bridge the gap between observation and decision-making. The deceptive
opponent modeling module will shape the multi-modal opponent, the proactive network interdiction
module will provide bounded resource allocation for defense. So, GRC will identify the goals with
topological soft q learning and provide proactive interdiction resource allocation.
3.1	SSP-MDP FOR S-GRC
Different from the GRD problem, we employ more applicable and soft measure of interdiction with
bounded resource to control the goal recognition process. With this motivation in mind, we use
the Stochastic Shortest-Path MDP (SSP-MDP) (Kolobov & Kolobov, 2012) model, which is widely
used for uncertainty given an initial state, a set of goal states, actions with probabilistic outcomes and
an action cost function. A SSP-MDP is represented as a tuple hS, s0, A, T, C, Gi, which consists a
set of states S, a initial state s0, a set of actions A, a transition function T : S × A × S → [0, 1] of
state transition from s to s0 after executing the action a, and a cost function C : S × A × S → R
that gives the cost of executing action a, and a set of terminal goals G ⊆ S. With a cost function to
replace the reward function, the objective is to find a optimal policy π so as to minimize the smallest
expected cost or travel time of the policy, which forms the map from states to actions.
So, the optimal policy of the SSP-MDP can be find by using the Value Iteration (VI) algorithm,
which use a value function V to represent expected costs. The expected cost of an optimal policy
∏* for the starting state s° ∈ S is the expected cost V(s0), and the expected cost for all states S ∈ S
can be calculated by the Bellman equation (Kolobov & Kolobov, 2012):
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: The OODA cycle embedded with stochastic goal recognition control (S-GRC): one de-
ceptive opponent modeling module and one goal recognition control module.
V (s) = min	T (s, a, s0) [C (s, a, s0) + V (s0)]
a∈A
s0∈S
(1)
A previous work on stochastic shortest path network interdiction modeled the problem as one se-
quential bi-level attacker-defender game, where the defender moves first by deploying sensors to
the arcs in the network maximizing the expected shortest traveling time of the adversary (Zhang
et al., 2018). Here we formulate the stochastic goal recognition control (S-GRC) problem as an ex-
tension of the GRD problem to allows non-optimal agents and stochastic actions, which means the
agent’s action are not deterministic and the possible successor states are with probability, the mea-
sures we can take are interdictions with cost. The bounded interdiction resources allocations can
better model the real world applications. A S-GRC problem is represented as a tuple P = hD, Gi,
the domain information D = hS, s0, A, T, C, Gi can be represented as SSP-MDPs. Similar to
the S-GRD (Wayllace et al., 2018), we employ a metric to assess the largest number of actions an
agent can take or the largest cost an agent will incur before revealing the goal. Given a problem
P = hD, Gi, the worst case distinctiveness (wcd) of the problem can be defined as:
wcd(P) = max Vπ (s0)	(2)
So the objective of S-GRC under network interdiction can be reformulated as one optimization
problem of finding a subset of actions ∆A ⊂ A:
A A *	♦ T/ A∖
△A* = argminWcd(P)
∆A⊂A
s.t. V∏;S (so)=吟^ (so)	Vg ∈ G
∑(1∆A* X I) ≤ k
(3)
1	T~l	! ^Γ∖ X-Y∖ ∙ , 1	1 1	.,11	∙ τ∖	/c	A ΓΠ Z-1 X-I ∖ * ∙ , 1	1	F
where P = hD, Gi is the problem with domain D = S, so , A, T, C, G , A is the redesigned
action set with △A* interdicted, I is the corresponding cost to the interdiction resource, the total
interdiction resource allocation is bounded by k.
3.2	Augmented SSP-MDP with SCCs
With the metric wcd, we can measure the maximal number of actions an agent can take before
its goal is revealed. However, the formal wcd related metrics for S-GRDs are inconsistent with
the intuitive definition, the wcd computation is not Markovian owing to the set of possible goals
depend on the observed trajectory to a state. To deal with the uncertain inconsistence, wcdag and
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ECD together with topological value iteration are employed to model the problem, in which the
augmented MDPs with strongly connected components do not have loops (Wayllace et al.).
The state space of an MDP can be represented as a directed connectivity graph. One example MDP
is shown in Figure 3(a), where the states are denoted by nodes, the actions are denoted by edges,
the transitions are related to the arrow. The wcd may be infinite when the state space contains some
cycle loop, here we can use the Tarjan algorithm (Tarjan, 1972; Hou et al., 2014) to generate strongly
connected components (SCCs), which form a directed acyclic graph (DAG) as shown in Figure 3(b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Augmented MDP with strong connected components (SCCs).
Augmented SSP-MDP for S-GRC: Given a SSP-MDP, an augmented SSP-MDP
(S ,S0, A, T, C，G
augments each component of the tuple:
ι-<	1	, ,	^ _ A ∙	.	1 1	/	r-∖ l∖
•	Each state S ∈ S is represented by (s, G0).
•	The augmented initial state is sS0 = hs0, Gi.
•	Each augmented action a ∈ A is a tuple(a, G0), where aA and G0 is the set of all goals
for which that action is an optimal action.
•	The new transition function T : S × A × S → [0, 1] gives the probability T (sS, aS, sS0),
where sS = hs, G0), aS = ha,G0), and sS0 = hs0, G0 ∩ G00), TS(sS,Sa,sS0) = T (s, a, s0), if
|G0 ∩ G00| > 1 and equals 0 otherwise.
•	The cost function C : S × A × S → R+ gives the cost C (sS, aS, sS0) of executing action aS
in augmented state sS and arriving in sS00. This cost equals the cost C (sS, aS, sS0) = C(s, a, s0)
under the same condition as above.
•	The augmented goal states G ⊆ S are those augmented states hs, G0) for which any exe-
cution ofan augmented action will transition to an augmented state hs0, G000) with one goal
or no goals.
3.3	Deceptive Opponent Modeling
As the opponent may change the goals midway to mislead the goal recognition process. We use a
binary variable λ ∈ {0, 1} to characterize whether the opponent is a optimal or deceptive with decoy
goals.
Depending on λ, the opponent is expected to exhibit different behaviors, which is fully described by
an opponent policy ∏o(aO∣st). This model is restrictive since the action probability only depend on
the current state. Nonetheless, we use this model only for policy learning, and use a general history
dependent opponent policy for the evaluation of the learned autonomous agent policy. Another
implicit assumption of this model is that the opponent has full observability over the states. This
assumption could be released by modeling the opponent as a POMDP agent.
Neutral Opponent: If the opponent is a civilian, i.e. λ = 0, we assume a simple reactive policy
∏cil(aO |st) is available to model the opponent:
∏o(aθ∣st,λ = 0)= ∏cil(aθ∣st).	(4)
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: Sample table title
PART	DESCRIPTION	
Dendrite Axon Soma	Input terminal Output terminal Cell body (contains cell nucleus)
Deceptive Opponent: We use the following equation to model an adversarial agent’s policy πo :
πo(aθ∣st,λ = 1; α,β) =argmin∏∈∆{KL(π∣πMDP) + βKL(π∣πo(∙∣st,λ = 0))},	(5)
∏MDP(aθ∣st, λ =1) = eαQ(st,a°)∕Z(St),	(6)
where KL(∙∣∙) denotes the KUllback-Leibler divergence between two distributions, The goal-
achieving policy παMDP is associated with the optimal Q function Q(St, ato), of a goal-achieving
adversary MDP defined later. The temperature parameter α in (6) represents the level of rational-
ity of the adversary. The other parameter β indicates the level of deception. Z(St) is the partition
function that normalizes παMDP.
Soft Q Learning: We use soft-Q learning (Haarnoja, 2018) to learn a stochastic belief space policy.
The soft Q learning objective is to maximize the expected reward regularized by the entropy of the
policy,
X Ebt,st,at 〜ρ∏ γt[r(bt, st, at) + σH (π(-∖bt, St))].	⑺
t
The parameter σ controls the ‘softness’ of the policy. The nice interpretation of this objective func-
tion is maximizing accumulative reward while behaving as uncertain as possible, which is a desired
property against an adversary.
This maximum entropy problem is solved using soft Q iteration. For discrete action space, the fixed
point iteration:
Qsoft(bt, st, at) J rt + YEbt+1 ,St+ι^ps [Vsoft(bt+1, st+1)],	(8)
KOft(bt,St) J σ log X exp(1 QSoft(bt,st,a)),	⑼
σ
a∈A
converges to the optimal soft value functions Q*oft and Koft (Haarnoja, 2018), and the optimal policy
can be obtained from:
nMaxEnt(at|bt, st) = exp(σ(QSOft(bt, st, at) - Vsoft (bt, St))).	(IO)
3.4 Proactive Network Interdiction
Proactive network interdiction
4	Experiments
4.1	Grid World
4.2	Network Graph
4.3	Results
5	Conclusion And Future Work
Risk-Sensitive MDPs (Hou et al., 2014) illustrate one applicable scenario where the cost function is
constrained with one threshold or deadline.
See Table 1.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Acknowledgments
This work is partially sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
No. 61702528, No. 61806212.
References
Mohamadreza Ahmadi, Suda Bharadwaj, Takashi Tanaka, and Ufuk Topcu. Stochastic games with
sensing costs. In 2018 56th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Com-
Puting (Allerton),pp. 275-282. IEEE, 2018.
Stefano V Albrecht and Peter Stone. Autonomous agents modelling other agents: A comprehensive
survey and open problems. Artificial Intelligence, 258:66-95, 2018.
Samuel Ang, Hau Chan, Albert Xin Jiang, and William Yeoh. Game-theoretic goal recognition
models with applications to security domains. In International Conference on Decision and Game
Theory for Security, pp. 256-272. Springer, 2017.
Boris Belousov and Jan Peters. Entropic regularization of markov decision processes. Entropy, 21
(7):674, 2019.
Tathagata Chakraborti, Anagha Kulkarni, Sarath Sreedharan, David E Smith, and Subbarao Kamb-
hampati. Explicability? legibility? predictability? transparency? privacy? security? the emerging
landscape of interpretable agent behavior. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 29, pp. 86-96, 2019.
David Ettinger and Philippe Jehiel. A theory of deception. American Economic Journal: Microeco-
nomics, 2(1):1-20, 2010.
Amir-massoud Farahmand. Regularization in Reinforcement Learning. PhD thesis, University of
Alberta, 2011.
Matthieu Geist, Bruno Scherrer, and Olivier Pietquin. A theory of regularized markov decision
processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2160-2169, 2019.
Jordi Grau-Moya, Felix Leibfried, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. Balancing two-player stochastic
games with soft q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03216, 2018.
Nicolas Le Guillarme, Abdel Illah Mouaddib, Sylvain Gatepaille, and Amandine Bellenger. Ad-
versarial intention recognition as inverse game-theoretic planning for threat assessment. In IEEE
International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja. Acquiring Diverse Robot Skills via Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement
Learning. PhD thesis, UC Berkeley, 2018.
Cosmo Harrigan. Deep reinforcement learning with regularized convolutional neural fitted q itera-
tion. differences, 14:1.
Ping Hou, William Yeoh, and Pradeep Varakantham. Revisiting risk-sensitive mdps: New al-
gorithms and results. In Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling, 2014.
Sarah Keren, Avigdor Gal, and Erez Karpas. Goal recognition design. In Twenty-Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2014.
Sarah Keren, Avigdor Gal, and Erez Karpas. Privacy preserving plans in partially observable envi-
ronments. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pp. 3170-3176. AAAI Press, 2016.
Sarah Keren, Avigdor Gal, and Erez Karpas. Strong stubborn sets for efficient goal recognition
design. In Twenty-Eighth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2018.
Sarah Keren, Avigdor Gal, and Erez Karpas. Goal recognition design in deterministic environments.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 65:209-269, 2019.
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Mausam Kolobov and Andrey Kolobov. Planning with Markov decision processes. An AI perspec-
tive. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2012.
Anagha Kulkarni, Sarath Sreedharan, Sarah Keren, Tathagata Chakraborti, David E Smith, and Sub-
barao Kambhampati. Design for interpretability.
Anagha Kulkarni, Siddharth Srivastava, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Balancing goal obfusca-
tion and goal legibility in settings with cooperative and adversarial observers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.10672, 2019a.
Anagha Kulkarni, Siddharth Srivastava, and Subbarao Kambhampati. A unified framework for
planning in adversarial and cooperative environments. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
ArtificiaI Intelligence, volume 33,pp. 2479-2487, 2019b.
Nicolas Le Guillarme. A Game-Theoretic Planning Framework for Intentional Threat Assessment.
PhD thesis, These de doctorat, Universite de Caen, 2016.
Kyungjae Lee, Sungyub Kim, Sungbin Lim, Sungjoon Choi, and Songhwai Oh. Tsallis reinforce-
ment learning: A unified framework for maximum entropy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.00137, 2019.
Junren Luo, Xiang Ji, Wei Gao, Wanpeng Zhang, and Shaofei Chen. Goal recognition control under
network interdiction using a privacy information metric. Symmetry, 11(8):1059, 2019.
Peta Masters and Sebastian Sardina. Deceptive path-planning. In IJCAI, pp. 4368-4375, 2017.
Gergely Neu, Anders Jonsson, and Vicenc Gomez. A unified view of entropy-regularized markov
decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07798, 2017.
Swetasudha Panda and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Near-optimal interdiction of factored mdps. In
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Arrasy Rahman, and Stefano V Albrecht. Dealing with
non-stationarity in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04737,
2019.
Ramon Fraga Pereira, Nir Oren, and Felipe Meneguzzi. Landmark-based approaches for goal recog-
nition as planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11739, 2019.
Miquel Ramlrez and Hector Geffner. Plan recognition as planning. In Twenty-First International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2009.
Philip J Root. Collaborative UAV path planning with deceptive strategies. PhD thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2005.
Fariba Sadri. Logic-based approaches to intention recognition. In Handbook of Research on Ambient
Intelligence and Smart Environments: Trends and Perspectives, pp. 346-375. IGI Global, 2011.
Keren Sarah, Xu Haifeng, Kwapong Kofi, Parkes David, and Grosz Barbara. Information shaping
for enhanced goal recognition of partially-informed agents. In Heuristics and Search for Domain-
Independent Planning Workshop of ICAPS, 2019.
Yagiz Savas, Mohamadreza Ahmadi, Takashi Tanaka, and Ufuk Topcu. Entropy-regularized stochas-
tic games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11543, 2019.
Macheng Shen and Jonathan P How. Active perception in adversarial scenarios using maximum
entropy deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05644, 2019.
DJ Strouse, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Josh Tenenbaum, Matt Botvinick, and David J Schwab. Learning
to share and hide intentions using information regularization. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 10249-10259, 2018.
Gita Sukthankar, Christopher Geib, Hung Hai Bui, David Pynadath, and Robert P Goldman. Plan,
activity, and intent recognition: Theory and practice. Newnes, 2014.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Robert Tarjan. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM journal on computing, 1(2):
146-160,1972.
Pierre Thodoroff, Audrey Durand, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. Temporal regularization for
markov decision process. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1779-1789,
2018.
Zheng Tian, Ying Wen, Zhichen Gong, Faiz Punakkath, Shihao Zou, and Jun Wang. A regularized
opponent model with maximum entropy objective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08087, 2019.
Yevgeniy Vorobeychik and Michael Pritchard. Plan interdiction games. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.06162, 2018.
Christabel Wayllace. Stochastic goal recognition design. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 9904-9905, 2019.
Christabel Wayllace, Ping Hou, and William Yeoh. New metrics and algorithms for stochastic goal
recognition design problems.
Christabel Wayllace, Sarah Keren, William Yeoh, Avigdor Gal, and Erez Karpas. Accounting for
partial observability in stochastic goal recognition design: Messing with the marauders map. In
Heuristics and Search for Domain-Independent Planning Workshop of ICAPS, 2018.
Kai Xu, Kaiming Xiao, Quanjun Yin, Yabing Zha, and Cheng Zhu. Bridging the gap between
observation and decision making: Goal recognition and flexible resource allocation in dynamic
network interdiction.
Jing Zhang, Jun Zhuang, and Brandon Behlendorf. Stochastic shortest path network interdiction
with a case study of arizona-mexico border. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 179:62-73,
2018.
9