Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Disentangled GANs for Controllable Gener-
ation of High-Resolution Images
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved great success at generat-
ing realistic samples. However, achieving disentangled and controllable genera-
tion still remains challenging for GANs, especially in the high-resolution image
domain. Motivated by this, we introduce AC-StyleGAN, a combination of AC-
GAN and StyleGAN, for demonstrating that very limited supervision is sufficient
to benefit the generic disentanglement learning of high-resolution images. Specif-
ically, by only using 1% of the labelled data, the disentanglement quality is very
close to the fully supervised case and significantly outperforms the unsupervised
alternative. Inspired by the observed separation of fine and coarse styles in Style-
GAN, we then extend AC-StyleGAN to a new image-to-image model called FC-
StyleGAN for semantic manipulation of fine-grained factors in a high-resolution
image. In experiments, we show that FC-StyleGAN performs well in only control-
ling fine-grained factors, with the use of instance normalization, and also demon-
strate its good generalization ability to unseen images. Finally, we create two new
datasets - Falcor3D and Isaac3D with higher resolution, more photorealism, and
richer variation, as compared to existing disentanglement datasets.
1	Introduction
High-resolution controllable generation is an important component in many applications, such as
image editing (Yao et al., 2018), 3D scene understanding (Eslami et al., 2018) and inverse graph-
ics (Kulkarni et al., 2015). Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
have achieved great success at generating realistic images, of which two representatives are Style-
GAN (Karras et al., 2019) for unconditional generation and BigGAN (Brock et al., 2018) for class
conditional generation. However, the controllable generation is still a challenge for state-of-the-art
GANs, especially with high-resolution images. For instance, StyleGAN cannot be directly used to
synthesize high-fidelity human faces by specifically controlling skin color or eye size without af-
fecting other face attributes. Also, BigGAN is not able to control the hair color or length of a dog
image without changing other features.
Disentanglement of various factors allows us to independently control the variations across all the
factors. But this is not easy to learn in GANs without further modifications such as adding regular-
ization to encourage better disentanglement. For example, InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016) proposes
maximizing mutual information between latent code and its reconstruction for an unsupervised dis-
entanglement. Most recently, Locatello et al. (2019a) has showed that unsupervised disentanglement
learning is impossible without model inductive bias or supervision. In that light, several recent works
attempt to learn disentanglement in GANs by introducing a strong model bias (Nguyen-Phuoc et al.,
2019). However, these works are restricted to a specific domain (e.g. 3D rotations only) and usually
difficult to scale up to higher resolution, mainly due to the intrinsic limitations of the model biases
themselves. This motivates us to study the impact of limited supervision in a generic disentangle-
ment learning with GANs, especially in the more challenging high-resolution image domain.
Main contributions: By combining the advantages of AC-GAN (Odena et al., 2017) and Style-
GAN, we introduce AC-StyleGAN, and demonstrate that, very limited supervision is sufficient: just
1% of the labelled data significantly improves the disentanglement quality, as compared to the unsu-
pervised alternatives. However, if we are only interested in controlling a subset of factors (effectively
treating the rest as random unobserved nuisance variables), we find that the disentanglement qual-
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ity of AC-StyleGAN degrades significantly. We believe this is due to the latent nuisance factors
strongly confounding the observed factors, a common and difficult problem in high-dimensional
partially observed latent variables models (Bishop, 1998).
To address this, we propose FC-StyleGAN, a new image-to-image model that adds controllable fine-
grained factors along with a super-resolution process. This is inspired by the separation of fine and
coarse styles, observed in StyleGAN. FC-StyleGAN enables semantic manipulation of fine styles in
high-resolution images, without a commonly-used encoder-decoder structure.
Finally, We create two new high-quality datasets - Falcor3D and Isaac3D - that present a new
challenge for controllable generation in terms of image resolution, photorealism, and richness of
style factors, as compared to existing disentanglement datasets such as 3D Chairs (Aubry et al.,
2014), dSprite (Matthey et al., 2017) and MPI3D (Gondal et al., 2019).
Thus, we propose new semi-supervised GAN architectures that enable a generic disentanglement
learning of high-resolution images as well as new high-quality disentanglement datasets.
2	Related Work
Disentanglement learning. Learning generic disentangled representations in an unsupervised
way has attracted a lot of attention. Two representative models are InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016)
and β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017). The nature of unsupervised disentanglement learning does not
guarantee that the learned disentangled factors are semantically meaningful without an additional
inductive bias or supervision (Locatello et al., 2019a; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019; Locatello et al.,
2019b). Another line of work aims to learn disentangled representations via supervised learning
wherein factors are observed variables (Kulkarni et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2018;
Locatello et al., 2019b). However, little work has systematically investigated the necessity of very
limited supervision to generic disentanglement learning. The analysis of Locatello et al. (2019b)
only applies to disentangled VAEs on low-resolution datasets. Instead, our work tries to answer a
more practical question: with very little supervision on more complex and higher-resolution datasets,
can we still well disentangle the factors of variation while maintaining the high generation quality?
Deep image manipulation. Deep neural networks have enabled various image editing tasks, such
as style transfer (Gatys et al., 2016), image-to-image translation (Zhu et al., 2017), automatic col-
orization (Zhang et al., 2016) and 3D-aware attribute editing (Yao et al., 2018). None of the above
methods except the 3D-SDN (Yao et al., 2018) has dealt with the semantic manipulation of multiple
attributes for scene images. Different from the 3D-SDN and other previous works on attribute edit-
ing that have been mostly focused on the 3D geometry manipulation, our proposed FC-StyleGAN
is designed to semantically manipulate the fine-grained factors instead, such as lighting conditions
and object colors. Furthermore, FC-StyleGAN does not apply an encoder-decoder structure as com-
monly used in previous works for semantic manipulation (Yao et al., 2018), instead, it adds control-
lable fine-grained factors along with a super-resolution process, which turns out to perform well in
editing fine styles of high-resolution images with a good generalization ability.
3	Models
3.1	Background on AC-GAN and StyleGAN
AC-GAN. AC-GAN (Odena et al., 2017) is a variant of class conditional GANs. In the AC-GAN,
the generator inputs are a latent z (or called random noise) and the class label. The input to the
discriminator is the real or fake image, whilst its output is the probability that the image is real and
the prediction of the class label. Odena et al. (2017) has shown that this modification to the standard
conditional GAN formulation produces more realistic images and appears to stabilize training.
StyleGAN StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019) is a state-of-the-art GAN architecture for unsuper-
vised image generation, particularly for high-fidelity human faces. Basically, StyleGAN comprises
a mapping network whose role is to map the latent z to an intermediate space, which then controls
the styles at each convolutional layer in the synthesis network via adaptive instance normalization
(AdaIN) (Ulyanov et al., 2016; Huang & Belongie, 2017). StyleGAN also enables the separation
of fine-grained and coarse-grained features. For example, modifying the styles of low-resolution
blocks affects only coarse-grained features (e.g. pose and eyeglasses), while modifying the styles of
high-resolution blocks affects only fine-grained features (e.g. color scheme and microstructure).
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
(i) Generator
(ii) Discriminator
G Real Image )
(i) Generator
(ii) Discriminator
(a) AC-StyleGAN
(b) FC-StyleGAN
Figure 1: An overview of model architectures (a) AC-StyleGAN and (b) FC-StyleGAN. (a) The generator con-
ditions on meta code for generation and the discriminator predicts its value. (b) We downsample the real image
into 32x32 resolution and replace the lower resolution blocks (4x4 - 32x32) in the AC-StyleGAN generator by
a new input block. Also, the discriminator predicts the value of fine code from the 32x32 block instead.
3.2	AC-StyleGAN for Controllable Image Synthesis
We introduce AC-StyleGAN, a combination of AC-GAN and StyleGAN, that enables conditional
generation of high-resolution images. As shown in Figure 1a, the generator in AC-StyleGAN con-
ditions on a meta code by simply concatenating the meta code, a vector representing all the factors
of variation, with the latent z. The discriminator in AC-StyleGAN now provides two outputs, the
classification of real/fake and the prediction of meta code. And finally, the outputs of the mapping
network - the conditioned styles - will modulate each block in the synthesis network via AdaIN.
We choose AC-GAN, instead of other conditional GAN methods, such as cGANs (with Projec-
tion Discriminator) (Miyato & Koyama, 2018), mainly because only AC-GAN has the property of
reconstructing meta code in the discriminator, which can easily be extended to a semi-supervised
disentanglement learning framework.
More formally, let x(rn) denote the n-th image from the set of N real images and let c(rn) be the
corresponding meta code, randomly sampled from the dataset. Let c(fn) denote a random meta code
sampled from the label distribution, and let D(∙) and G(∙) denote the discriminator and generator
neural networks. We also assume s(rn) and s(fn) represent the real and fake classification logits in the
discriminator, respectively, and ^rn) and ^fn) denote the predictions of Crn) and Cfn), respectively.
From Figure 1a, we have
(Srn),Crn)) = D(Xrn)) and (Sfn),Cfn))= D(G(cffn) ,z(τ')))	(1)
Since we are aiming at achieving both high image quality and good controllability, we define a
semi-supervised loss function for the generator and discriminator in AC-StyleGAN as follows,
1 N-1
L(G)(G, D) = N X Igan(s" Sfn)) +γ
n=0 S------------------------{z------}
GAN loss
unsupervised disentanglement
N-1	(n)
L(D)(G,D)= — ɪ χ	iGAN(srn),sfn))+Y	k^fn)	-cfn)k	+ JNnIY	k^rn) -dn)k
N n=0 `-------{一L	Pn=on(n)
GAN loss	unsupervised disentanglement	supervised disentanglement
(2)
which consists of three terms: the GAN loss term, unsupervised disentanglement term and super-
vised disentanglement term. For the GAN loss, we apply the non-saturating loss plus gradient
penalty in the discriminator, as in StyleGAN. For both the unsupervised and supervised disentangle-
ment terms, we simply use l2 norm of the reconstruction losses.
Furthermore, we introduce two coefficients γ and η(n) in the above loss function: (i) the disentan-
glement coefficient γ ∈ (0, ∞) balances the trade-off between the generation quality and disen-
tanglement performance; (ii) the coefficient η(n) is the label mask denoted by η(n) = 1{α(n) <α}
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
i.i.d.
where α(n) 〜 Uniform[0,1] and α ∈ [0,1] is a hyperparameter. Accordingly, the hyperparameter
α controls the fraction of labelled data that will be used for supervision (fully unsupervised in the
disentanglement learning if α = 0, and fully supervised if α = 1).
Note that We sample all the a(n)'s before training so that the label mask η(n) remains unchanged
during training to reflect the real semi-supervised case. We also apply a rescaling operation by mul-
tiplying the supervised disentanglement term in Eq. (2) with the rescaling coefficient	N-N(n)to
n=0 η
take an average of effective supervised signals within a minibatch. Finally, note that AC-StyleGAN
reduces to an InfoGAN variant in the special case of α = 0 (fully unsupervised), when an appropri-
ate reconstruction loss is used.
3.3 FC-StyleGAN for Semantic Manipulation of Fine Styles
While we apply AC-StyleGAN with supervision over all observed factors for demonstrating a con-
trollable generation of high-resolution images in GANs, in a potentially more realistic case where
we are only interested in controlling a subset of factors (effectively treating the rest as random un-
observed nuisance variables), the disentanglement quality of AC-StyelGAN drops significantly, as
shown in Section 4.2. Furthermore, AC-StyleGAN cannot be directly applied to manipulate an
existing high-resolution image. Therefore, we propose a new image-to-image model called FC-
StyleAGN (i.e., Fine-grained Controlled StyleGAN) for only controlling fine-grained factors.
Inspired by the observations that the lower resolution blocks in the StyleGAN generator learn the
coarse-grained features while its high-resolution blocks accounts for fine styles, the generator in
FC-StyleGAN does not contain the lower-resolution blocks. As shown in Figure 1b, the generator
instead takes the real image as one of its inputs by downscaling it to a lower resolution φ (e.g.,
φ = 32 in Figure 1b). After that, it generates the high-resolution image by only modulating the
fine-grained code into higher resolution blocks. Also, the discriminator in FC-StyleGAN predicts
the value of fine-grained code from the block with resolution φ, instead of the last output block.
The intuition is that similar to the observations in the generator, lower resolution blocks in the
discriminator have less relationship with fine-grained styles. So it makes more sense to directly
predict the meta code from higher resolution blocks. Note that the value of φ varies from 4 to
image size, determining what factors are identified as fine-grained. Finally, the loss function in
FC-StyleGAN is the same with Eq. (2) in AC-StyleGAN, indicating a semi-supervised approach.
During training of FC-StyleGAN, the generator takes the downscaled image as is, and just em-
bellishes it by increasing the resolution and generating the missing pixel-level detail. As it does
not need to learn the coarse-grained features any more, presumably it will have much easier time
handling complex high-resolution images. Furthermore, since the generator is still style-based in
higher-resolution blocks with fine-grained code as its input, we will retain the control over fine
styles. However, there are two caveats in FC-StyleGAN. The first caveat is that as an image-to-
image model, the original fine-grained factors in the input image may interference the control of
fine code over the fine styles in the output image. In such sense, we emphasize the role of inductive
biases on the model - the use of instance normalization in the generator. Because the output of in-
stance normalization preserves the spatial structure of image content by only normalizing fine styles
(Ulyanov et al., 2016), we argue that the original fine styles in the input image could be washed
away by instance normalization, and thus the fine code will fully control the fine-grained factors.
The second caveat is how to identify fine-grained factors in a dataset before training FC-StyleGAN.
To this end, we use the meta code of all factors as the input of FC-StyleGAN with different down-
scaled resolutions φ. For each φ, we introduce a new term - interpolation variance of each factor
ci, denoted by βi(φ), based on which the factor ci is defined as fine-grained at φ if its interpolation
variance satisfies that βi (φ) > β0, where β0 is a pre-defined threshold. The interpolation variance
βi(φ) is calculated as follows: Given N real images, we do the latent traversal over each factor ci(n)
of an image I(n) to get S interpolated (fake) images {IIn),…，I(N-J. Each interpolated image
Iin) is then fed into the discriminator to get a predicted factor ^(". Thus, the interpolation variance
(n)
is the average variance of over the interpolation s-dimension, which is
1 N -1
βi(φ) = n X Vars 卷)]
n=0
(3)
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Datasets	# of Images	# of Factors	Resolution	3D
dSprites	737,280	5	64x64	~~Γ~
Noisy dSprites	737,280	7	64x64	X
Scream dSprites	737,280	7	64x64	X
SmallNORB	48,600	5	128x128	✓
Cars3D	17,568	3	64x64	✓
3dshapes	480,000	7	64x64	✓
MPI3D	640,800	7	64x64	✓
Falcor3D	233,280	7	1024x1024	✓
Isaac3D	737,280	9	512x512	✓
Table 1: Summary of the proposed two datasets, compared with currently commonly-used datasets (Gondal
et al., 2019). We can see that the proposed two datasets - Faclor3D and Isaac3D both have much larger
resolutions than previous datasets, together with the maximum number of factors. Furthermore, in terms of
photorealism, both datasets are rendered based on a complex 3D scene, in particular with texturing in Isaac3D.
Intuitively, low interpolation variance βi (φ) means that changing the factor ci does not affect much
the generated images, which further implies the factor ci should not be considered as fine-grained,
since FC-StyleGAN with downscaled resolution φ cannot control it any more.
4	Experiments
In this section, we first introduce two new datasets - ISaaC3D and Falcor3D. We then evaluate the
performance of AC-StyleGAN and FC-StyleGAN on both datasets, focusing on three aspects: dis-
entanglement quality, semantic correctness and image quality. Quantitatively, we use Frechet In-
ception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) to measure image quality, reconstruction error (i.e.,
lrec = ∣∣c(r) - c(r) k) to measure semantic correctness, and MIG (Chen et al., 2018) to measure
disentanglement quality. Qualitatively, we apply the latent traversals to visually evaluate all three
aspects as well. Due to space limitations, we only show results on Isaac3D in this section; results on
Falcor3D are quite similar to those on Isaac3D, and are available in the appendix.
4.1	Creation of High-Quality Disentanglement Datasets
Current disentanglement datasets, such as 3D Chairs (Aubry et al., 2014), dSprites (Matthey et al.,
2017) and MPI3D (Gondal et al., 2019), are of low resolution and mostly lack of photorealism.
It makes them not suitable as disentanglement benchmarks in the high-resolution image domain.
To this end, we propose two new datasets - Fαlcor3D and Isaac3D, which possess much higher
resolution, better photorealism and richer factors of variations, as shown in Table 1.
Falcor3D In the Falcor dataset, there are in total 233,280 images and each has a resolution of
1024x1024. This dataset is based on the 3D scene of a living room, where we can move the camera
positions and change the lighting conditions. Each image is paired with a ground-truth meta code,
consisting of 7 factors of variation: lighting intensity (5), lighting x-dir (6), lighting y-dir (6), light-
ing z-dir (6), camera x-pos (6), camera y-pos (6), and camera z-pos (6). Note that the number m
behind each factor represents that the factor has m possible values, uniformly sampled in the nor-
malized range of variations [0, 1]. To interpret this, for example, “lighting x-dir (6)” represents the
lighting direction moving along the x-axis and “camera z-pos (6)” represents the camera position
moving along the z-axis. Also, both factors have 6 values uniformly sampled from [0, 1].
Isaac3D In the Isaac3D dataset, there are in total 737,280 images and each has a resolution of
512x512. This dataset is based on the 3D scene of a kitchen, where we can also move the camera
positions and vary the lighting conditions. To further increase the number of variations, we put
a robotic arm inside, attached with an object. The robotic arm has two degrees of freedom: x-
movement (or horizontal rotation) and y-movement (or vertical rotation). The attached object could
change its shape, scale and color. To make the rendered images more photorealistic, each object in
the 3D scene has been provided with proper textures. Finally, each image is paired with a ground-
truth meta code, consisting of 9 factors of variation: lighting intensity (4), lighting y-dir (6), object
color (4), wall color (4), object shape (3), object scale (4), camera height (4), robot x-movement (8),
and robot y-movement (5). Similarly, the number m behind each factor represents that the factor
has m possible values, uniformly sampled in the normalized range of variations [0, 1].
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: Latent traversal of AC-StyleGAN with full supervision on ISaaC3D. For illustration, we only show
three factors: (robot x-movement, camera height, lighting y-dir). Please see the appendix for latent traversal
of all the factors. Images in the first column (marked by red box) are randomly sampled real images with the
ground-truth and the rest images in each row are their interpolations, respectively, by uniformly varying the
given factor from 0 to 1. Unless otherwise stated, this setting applies to all the latent traversal results below.
Figure 3: Quantitative metrics — MIG, lrec and FID vary with the supervision coefficient α ∈
{0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 1.0} and the disentanglement coefficient γ ∈ {1, 10} in AC-StyleGAN on Isaac3D. For
MIG, the higher is better, while for lrec and FID, the lower is better.
Please see the appendix for more detailed descriptions of the two datasets.
4.2	Evaluation of AC-StyleGAN
Latent traversal of AC-StyleGAN. We first show the latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN on
Isaac3D in Figure 2, where we apply full supervision from meta code of all the factors. For illus-
tration, here we only show three factors of variation: (robot x-movement, camera height, lighting
y-dir). Please see the appendix for latent traversal of all the factors. Images in the first column
(marked by red box) are randomly sampled real images and the rest images in each row are their in-
terpolations, respectively, by uniformly varying each factor from 0 to 1. Unless otherwise stated, this
setting applies to all the latent traversal results below. As we can see, each factor in the interpolated
images changes smoothly without affecting other factors. Taking “lighting y-dir” as an example,
only the direction of the point light gradually moves up from left to right in the bottom row, which
can be evidenced by the fact that the light spot moves up from the refrigerator to the wall and the
shadow of the cabinet on the wall moves down simultaneously. More importantly, all the interpo-
lated images visually look the same with the corresponding real images in the first column except for
the interpolated factors, and the image quality does not degrade over interpolation. Therefore, the
latent traversal results demonstrate three good properties of AC-StyleGAN with supervision: high
disentanglement quality and good semantic correctness and high generation quality.
Semi-supervised learning. How does AC-StyleGAN behave when given fewer labels? To this
end, we vary the supervision coefficient α in Eq. (2) to show the impact of supervision on AC-
StyleGAN and the results with γ ∈ {1, 10} on Isaac3D are in Figure 3. First, we can see with
limited supervision (α ≥ 0.1), the difference between γ = 1 and 10 is quite small. Also, both values
of MIG and lrec almost reach their own optimal ones, along with a lower FID. This quantitatively
supports the above latent traversal results in Figure 2. As expected, the disentanglement quality
and semantic correctness gradually get worse when less labelled data is used. Interestingly, the gap
between γ = 1 and 10 first increases and then decreases as α decreases from 0.5 to 0, with the largest
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
object
color
latent
Z
object
scale
(a) Supervision from a subset of factors
Figure 4: (a) Latent traversal of AC-StyleGAN on ISaaC3D, where we only control a subset of factors: (robot x-
movement, robot y-movement, object scale, lighting y-dir, object color) and here two of them are shown. Please
see the appendix for all five considered factors. (b) Interpolation variances of each factor in FC-StyleGAN
with different downscaled resolutions φ on Isaac3D, where the meta code of all factors is used as its input.
Empirically, the factor with its interpolation variance below the threshold (marked by the green line) cannot be
controlled by FC-StyleGAN with the given φ.
¢=16
(b) Identifying fine-grained factors
one at α = 0.01. It means that properly increasing γ is the most beneficial for disentanglement in
the case where only a very limited number of labelled data is provided. As we can see, by only using
1% of the labelled data (α = 0.01) and setting γ = 10, the disentanglement quality and semantic
correctness are still close to those with full supervision (α = 1), and improve over the unsupervised
baseline (α = 0) by a significant margin. Please see the appendix for the latent traversal results
of AC-StyleGAN with α = 0.01 and γ = 10. It means adding a very small amount of labelled
data into the training dataset could benefit much the disentanglement learning. Finally, in terms of
image quality, we observe that larger α tends to result in a lower FID score, which means better
disentanglement is not always obtained by sacrificing the generation quality.
Comparisons with different baselines. Current start-of-the-art approaches for generic unsuper-
vised disentanglement learning are mostly VAE-based models, such as β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017),
FactorVAE (Kim & Mnih, 2018) and β-TCVAE (Chen et al., 2018). To this end, we use the unsu-
pervised version of AC-StyleGAN (α = 0) to compare with VAE-based models on (i) the dSprites
dataset and (ii) the Isaac3D dsataset, respectively. Note that for evaluations on Isaac3D, we first
downscale its resolution to 128x128 because VAEs have difficulties in generating higher-resolution
images. We can see from Table 2 that the unsupervised AC-StyleGAN consistently outperforms
all the start-of-the-art disentangled VAEs on both datasets. Particularly on the downscaled Isaac3D
dataset, disentangled VAEs have much higher FID scores (FID > 100), indicating their poor image
generation quality. Please see Appendix A.5 for their randomly sampled images. Interestingly, the
disentangled VAEs also fail to capture all the variations in the Isaac3D dataset, supporting the claim
that our datasets provide larger variation of factors for disentanglement learning.
Previous work on the semi-supervised learning for classification has shown that a supervised base-
line with only the labelled data could be very competitive (Oliver et al., 2018; Zhai et al., 2019).
Hence, to demonstrate the effectiveness of actual semi-supervised components for disentanglement,
we also compare our semi-supervised method with the supervised baseline, in which we remove the
unsupervised disentanglement term in the discriminator loss function of Eq. (2). The results are
shown in Table 3. We can see that when only 1% or 5% of lablled data is available, semi-supervised
AC-StyleGAN consistently outperforms the supervised baseline in terms of all three metrics: FID,
MIG and lrec. Moreover, the advantages of using the unsupervised disentanglement term become
larger when we have fewer labelled data.
Latent traversal on 256x256 CelebA. To show the performance of AC-StyleGAN on the real-
world data, we also provide the qualitative results on CelebA with resolution 256x256 (Liu et al.,
2015). In this experiment, the meta code in AC-StyleGAN has a length of 40 to capture all the
attributes in the dataset. Hence, this is more challenging than the previous works on CelebA in
terms of controlling all the attributes in a higher resolution (Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017;
Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019). Note that since CelebA only has binary attributes, which commonly-
used disentanglement metrics including MIG and FactorVAE score are not applicable to, we focus
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Methods	FaCtorVAE Score	MIG	Methods	FID	MIG
β-VAE	0.731 ± 0.020-	0.177 ± 0.031	β-VAE	122.6 ± 2.0	0.231 ± 0.068
FactorVAE	0.757 ± 0.107	0.157 ± 0.051	FactorVAE	305.8 ± 142.1	0.245 ± 0.034
β-TCVAE	0.783 ± 0.057	0.198 ± 0.019	β-TCVAE	155.4 ± 13.6	0.216 ± 0.074
Ours (γ = 1)	0.760 ± 0.050-	0.213 ± 0.090	Ours (γ = 1)	4.27 ± 1.12	0.372 ± 0.126
Ours (γ = 10)	0.840 ± 0.090	0.290 ± 0.098	Ours (γ = 10)	3.20 ± 0.30	0.291 ± 0.077
(a) dSprites with resolution 64x64
(b) Isaac3D with resolution 128x128
Table 2: Comparison of unsupervised AC-StyleGAN and state-of-the-art VAE-based models: β-VAE, Fac-
torVAE and β-TCVAE on the dSprites and downscaled Isaac3D datasets. Note that the scores of VAE-based
models are obtained based on the implementation in Locatello et al. (2019a), where we set β = 6 for β-VAE,
γ = 30 for FactorVAE and β = 8 for β-TCVAE after a grid search over different hyperparameters.
Methods		FID	MIG	lrec
5%	Sup. baseline	2.80 ± 0.22	0.963 ± 0.007	0.131 ± 0.013
	Ours	2.25 ± 0.41	0.990 ± 0.002	0.035 ± 0.010
1%	Sup. baseline	3.58 ± 0.20	0.766 ± 0.042	0.358 ± 0.067
	Ours	2.74 ± 0.20	0.848 ± 0.085	0.231 ± 0.157
Table 3: Comparison of semi-supervised AC-StyleGAN with the supervised baseline, where we use γ = 10
and consider two cases of using 5% and 1% of labelled data. In the supervised baseline, we remove the
unsupervised disentanglement term in the discriminator loss function of Eq. (2).
on the qualitative results of latent traversal. The results are shown in Figure 5. We can see that
AC-styleGAN can smoothly interpolate in the latent space of face attributes and also maintain high
image quality. More interesting interpolations can be seen in Appendix A.6, where some attributes
are more difficult to change during latent traversal, presumably due to the fact that these attributes
have low frequency in the CelebA dataset, such as Mustache on female faces.
Only controlling a subset of style factors. Instead of trying to control all the factors in a dataset,
practically speaking we may only be interested in a subset of factors in which case the remaining fac-
tors will be considered as random nuisances captured by the latent z. On a first look, it might seem
intuitive that the fewer factors of variation we try to control, the better the disentanglement quality
we should achieve. However, the latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN( Figure 4a) show instead
that both disentanglement quality and semantic correctness degrade. For example, the camera height
changes when interpolating the object scale, and the wall color also varies when interpolating the
object scale. Furthermore, the latent z, which is expected to capture the remaining factors: (object
shape, camera height, lighting intensity, wall color), can barely change the camera height and wall
color (see the appendix for results of other factors). To explain this, we argue that since factors are
highly correlated with each other, learning to control one may help a lot in learning to control the
others. Without observations on other nuisance factors, it may be very difficult to disentangle the
impact of the observed factor with unobserved covariates, especially in the high-dimensional space.
4.3	Evaluation of FC-StyleGAN
Identifying fine-grained factors. As we have discussed, it is a crucial for FC-StyleGAN to quan-
titatively identify fine-grained factors. Here we calculate the interpolation variance of each factor
according to Eq. (3) by setting N = 100, S = 10. Figure 4b shows the interpolation variance of
each factor in FC-StyleGAN with downscaled resolution φ varying from 4 to 128 on Isaac3D. To
decide the threshold β0 , we visually check the latent traversal results and find that the interpolations
over a factor ci almost stay the same if βi(φ) < 0.055, which means β0 = 0.055. Please see the
appendix for the latent traversal results. We can see that as φ gets larger, more factors have an inter-
polation variance below the threshold β0 , meaning more coarse-grained factors appear. For instance,
there are only two coarse-grained factors at φ = 8: camera height and lighting direction, and two
more factors become coarse-grained factors at φ = 16: robot x-movement and robot y-movement,
and so on. Interestingly, wall color is always fine-grained even at φ = 128 while object color has
already become coarse-grained at φ = 64, although both of them are about colors.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Male
Open
Mouth
Bangs
Grey
Hair
Figure 5: Latent traversal of AC-StyleGAN on CelebA with resolution 256x256, where we control all 40
binary attributes at the same time and show four representative ones: Male, Open Mouse, Bangs, Grey Hair.
object
scale
object
color
Figure 6: Latent traversal of FC-StyleGAN with downscaled resolution φ = 16 on Isaac3D, where We only
control a subset of fine-grained factors: (object scale, lighting intensity, object color, wall color) and here two
of them are shown. Please see the appendix for all the four factors.
Latent traversal of FC-StyleGAN. Based on the above observations, we can obtain the latent
traversal results of FC-StyleGAN on fine-grained factors, which are shown in Figure 6. Specifically,
we train FC-StyleGAN with downscaled resolution φ = 16 on Isaac3D. Since Figure 4b indicates
that fine-grained factors at φ = 16 are of index (0,4,5, 7, 8), we use its subset: (object scale, light-
ing intensity, object color, wall color) as the input while leaving the object shape together with all
the coarse-grained factors as random nuisances. We can see each considered factor in the interpo-
lated images changes smoothly without affecting other factors, which implies good disentanglement
quality. Because FC-StyleGAN is only applicable for fine-grained control, we can observe that, on
the one hand, the coarse-grained factors of the interpolated images always stay the same with the
corresponding input image, even though they are random nuisances. On the other hand, the object
shape, as the only one fine-grained random nuisance, could be different from the corresponding in-
put image with some probability. In Figure 6, for example, the object shape stays the same with the
input image when interpolating the object scale, while it becomes different from the input image
when interpolating the object color. More importantly, compared with the results of AC-StyleGAN
in Figure 4a, FC-StyleGAN has much better disentanglement quality, when it comes to fine-grained
control with supervision from a subset of factors.
Impact of instance normalization. Now we want to show that without instance normalization in
FC-StyleGAN, the input image can interference the control of fine-grained code over the output fine
styles. The results of FC-StyleGAN with and without instance normalization are shown in Figure
7a, where both are trained with downscaled resolution φ = 32 on Isaac3D, and only a subset of fine-
grained factors (lighting intensity, object color, wall color) is used as supervision. For illustration,
Figure 7a only shows the the wall color for comparison. Please see the appendix for all three factors.
We can see that without instance normalization, latent traversal in FC-StyleGAN cannot change the
wall color any more, which instead stays the same with the input image. This confirms our previous
hypothesis that the instance normalization plays an important role in alleviating the impact of the
input image in controlling fine-grained features over generation. Also, the quantitative results in
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
wall
color
wall
color
w/ in： FID=6.16, MIG=0.992, l rer=0.07
w/o IN: FID=8.17, MIG=0.990, l rec=O∙1°
(a) Impact of instance normalization
wall
color
(Φ = 16)
wall
color
(Φ = 32)
wall
color
(Φ = 64)
(b) Generalization to unseen images
Figure 7: (a) Comparison of FC-StyleGAN with instance normalization (top row) and without instance nor-
malization (bottom row). Both are trained with downscaled resolution φ = 32 on Isaac3D, where We only
disentangle a subset of fine factors (lighting intensity, object color, wall color) and here only one are shown
(see the appendix for all three considered factors). (b) Generalization of FC-StyleGAN by varying the down-
scaled resolution φ and interpolating the wall color. In the test image, we shift the position of the robot arm to
the right-hand side, which is also attached with an unseen object (i.e., octahedron).
Figure 7a further confirm the advantages of using instance normalization. In particular, the fact that
the reconstruction error lrec becomes larger without instance normalization implies that the strong
interference of the input image also degrades the prediction of fine-grained code in the discriminator.
Generalization to unseen images. As an image-to-image model, it is natural to ask how FC-
StyleGAN generalizes to unseen images. To test its generalization ability, the novel test images are
provided as follows: i) we shift the robot position to the right hand side of the camera (instead of
standing right in the middle for the training dataset), and ii) we also attach the robot arm with an
unseen object. Figure 7b shows the results of interpolating the wall color of the same test image with
different downscaled resolutions φ ∈ {16, 32, 64}. Please see the appendix for results of other test
images and different fine-grained factors. As we can see, the wall color keeps changing during its
interpolations in each case without affecting other factors, implying good disentanglement quality.
Furthermore, the interpolated images in each case maintain the new robot position and particularly
maintain new object shape (i.e., octahedron) in the case of φ = 64. The reason the new object shape
is only maintained at φ = 64 is because that the object shape, together with the robot position, is
not fine-grained at φ = 64 any more. Therefore, it demonstrates that the disentanglement learning
of FC-StyleGAN can generalize well to unseen novel test images. Finally, Figure 7b shows that the
generalization results get better in terms of image quality as we increase the downscaled resolution
φ. As we know, with the larger value of φ, we can control fewer fine-grained factors. Therefore,
there exists a trade-off between the generalization and controllability in FC-StyleGAN. We leave the
investigation into how to improve this trade-off in the future work.
5	Conclusions
In this work, we developed AC-StyleGAN, by combining both advantages of AC-GAN and Style-
GAN, to demonstrate that it is possible to perfectly disentangle and control different factors of vari-
ation in the high-resolution image domain with sufficient supervision. In particular, with only 1% of
labelled data, the disentanglement quality is very close to the fully supervised case and outperforms
the fully unsupervised case by a significant margin, emphasizing the importance of (weak) supervi-
sion. To address the performance degradation of AC-StyleGAN in cases where we observe/control
only a subset of factors, we proposed FC-StyleGAN, a new image-to-image model for semantically
manipulating fine-grained factors of a given high-fidelity image. We demonstrated the importance
of instance normalization in FC-StyleGAN, and also showed its good generalization ability to un-
seen images. Finally, we proposed two new datasets - Falcor3D and Isaac3D with higher resolution,
better photorealism and richer factors of variation, compared to current disentanglement datasets.
We believe that our proposed models, new datasets, along with the useful insights we have gleaned,
can benefit the further development of disentangled GANs for the controllable generation of high-
fidelity images. For the future work, we would like to explore how to control coarse-grained factors
only in high-resolution images while leaving fine-grained factors as random nuisances.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
References
Mathieu Aubry, Daniel Maturana, Alexei A Efros, Bryan C Russell, and Josef Sivic. Seeing 3d
chairs: exemplar part-based 2d-3d alignment using a large dataset of cad models. In Proceedings
ofthe IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3762-3769, 2014.
Christopher M Bishop. Latent variable models. In Learning in graphical models, pp. 371U03.
Springer, 1998.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Tian Qi Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B Grosse, and David K Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disentan-
glement in variational autoencoders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
2610-2620, 2018.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2172-2180, 2016.
SM Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Fabio Viola, Ari S Morcos, Marta Gar-
nelo, Avraham Ruderman, Andrei A Rusu, Ivo Danihelka, Karol Gregor, et al. Neural scene
representation and rendering. Science, 360(6394):1204-1210, 2018.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pp. 2414-2423, 2016.
Muhammad Waleed Gondal, Manuel Wuthrich, Dorde Miladinovic, Francesco Locatello, Martin
BreidL Valentin Volchkov, Joel Akpo, Olivier Bachem, Bernhard Scholkopf, and Stefan Bauer.
On the transfer of inductive bias from simulation to the real world: anew disentanglement dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03292, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems (NIPS), 2014.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6626-6637, 2017.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
constrained variational framework. ICLR, 2(5):6, 2017.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance nor-
malization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1501-
1510, 2017.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 4401-4410, 2019.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 2654-2663, 2018.
Tejas D Kulkarni, William F Whitney, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Deep convolutional
inverse graphics network. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2539-2547,
2015.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
Scholkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4114-
4124, 2019a.
Francesco Locatello, Michael Tschannen, Stefan Bauer, Gunnar Ratsch, Bernhard Scholkopf,
and Olivier Bachem. Disentangling factors of variation using few labels. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.01258, 2019b.
Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dsprites: Disentanglement
testing sprites dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/dsprites-dataset/, 2017.
Takeru Miyato and Masanori Koyama. cgans with projection discriminator. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.05637, 2018.
Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Lucas Theis, Christian Richardt, and Yong-Liang Yang. Holo-
gan: Unsupervised learning of 3d representations from natural images. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.01326, 2019.
Augustus Odena, Christopher Olah, and Jonathon Shlens. Conditional image synthesis with auxil-
iary classifier gans. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-
Volume 70, pp. 2642-2651. JMLR. org, 2017.
Avital Oliver, Augustus Odena, Colin A Raffel, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Ian Goodfellow. Realis-
tic evaluation of deep semi-supervised learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 3235-3246, 2018.
Scott Reed, Kihyuk Sohn, Yuting Zhang, and Honglak Lee. Learning to disentangle factors of
variation with manifold interaction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1431-
1439, 2014.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing in-
gredient for fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
Taihong Xiao, Jiapeng Hong, and Jinwen Ma. Elegant: Exchanging latent encodings with gan for
transferring multiple face attributes. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), pp. 172-187, September 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Tzu Ming Hsu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Jiajun Wu, Antonio Torralba, Bill Freeman, and Josh
Tenenbaum. 3d-aware scene manipulation via inverse graphics. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp. 1887-1898, 2018.
Xiaohua Zhai, Avital Oliver, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. S4L: Self-supervised semi-
supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03670, 2019.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Colorful image colorization. In European confer-
ence on computer vision, pp. 649-666. Springer, 2016.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A Appendix
A. 1 More details of the proposed two datasets
A.1.1 Examples in the Isaac3D dataset
object shape
robot x-movement
camera height
object scale	lighting intensity
lighting y-dir
object color
Figure 8: Examples in the Isaac3D dataset where We vary each factor of variation individually.
wall color
13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.1.2 Examples in the Falcor3D dataset
lighting intensity
lighting x-dir
camera X-Pos
camera y-pos
camera Z-Pos
Figure 9: Examples in the Falcor3D dataset where we vary each factor of variation individually.
14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.2 IMAGE RECONSTRUCTIONS WITH THE SAME META CODE IN AC-STYLEGAN
real images
fake images
(a) Image reconstruction on random samples of Isaac3D
real images
fake images
(b) Image reconstruction on random samples of FalCor3D
Figure 10: Image reconstruction on random samples of Isaac3D and Falcor3D in AC-StyleGAN with full
supervision, where We can see that the generated fake images match well with real images by using the same
meta code as the generator input, confirming the semantic correctness of the model.
15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.3 MORE RESULTS ON LATENT TRAVERSAL OF AC-STYLEGAN
object
shape
robot
x-move.
robot
y-move.
camera
height
object
scale
lighting
intensity
lighting
y-dir
object
color
wall
color
Figure 11: Latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN with full supervision on Isaac3D for all the fac-
tors. Images in the first column (marked by red box) are randomly sampled real images of resolution
512x512 and the rest images in each row are their interpolations, respectively, by uniformly varying
the given factor from 0 to 1. We can see that each factor changes smoothly during its interpolation
without affecting other factors, and the interpolated images in each row visually look almost the
same with their input image except the considered varying factor. Also, the image quality does not
get worse during the interpolations.
16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
lighting
intensity
lighting
x-dir
lighting
y-dir
lighting
z-dir
camera
x-pos
camera
y-pos
camera
z-pos
Figure 12: Latent traversal results of AC-StyIeGAN with full supervision on FaIcor3D for all the
factors. Images in the first column (marked by red box) are randomly sampled real images of resolu-
tion 1024x1024 and the rest images in each row are their interpolations, respectively, by uniformly
varying the given factor from 0 to 1. We can see that each factor changes smoothly during its inter-
polation without affecting other factors, and the interpolated images in each row visually look very
similar to their input image except the considered varying factor. Also, the image quality does not
get worse during the interpolations.
17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.4 Latent traversal results AC-STYLEGAN with 1% labelled DATA
object
shape
robot
x-move.
robot
y-move.
camera
height
object
scale
lighting
intensity
lighting
y-dir
object
color
wall
color
Figure 13: Latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN with semi-supervision (α = 0.01) on Isaac3D for all
the factors. Images in the first column (marked by red box) are randomly sampled real images of resolution
512x512 and the rest images in each row are their interpolations, respectively, by uniformly varying the given
factor from 0 to 1. We can see that in most cases, each factor changes smoothly during its interpolation without
affecting other factors except the entanglement between the object shape and camera height. Also, except the
considered varying factor, the interpolated images in each row visually look similar to their input image with
small shifts sometimes. It implies a reasonably good disentanglement quality and semantic correctness in the
AC-StyleGAN with 1% labelled data. Similarly, the image quality does not get worse during the interpolations.
18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.5 Randomly sampled images of disentangled VAES ON THE downscaled
ISAAC3D DATASET
(a) β-VAE (FID=120.3)
(b) FactorVAE (FID=358.2)
(c) β-TCVAE (FID=143.8)
Figure 14: The randomly sampled images of disentangled VAEs on the Isaac3D dataset of resolution 128x128,
where We use the same network architectures as in Locatello et al. (2019a). We can see that compared with
AC-StyleGAN, (i) the generated images tend to be quite blurry and of low quality, (ii) the generated images fail
to cover all the variations in the dataset. The results of disentangled VAEs also demonstrate that our proposed
datasets serve as a new disentanglement challenge, in particular regarding the much higher resolution, and
larger variation of factors.
A.6 More latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN on CelebA
Young
Glasses
Straight
Hairs
Mustache
Wearing
Hat
Brushy
Eyebrows
Figure 15: More Latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN on CelebA with resolution 256x256, where We
control all 40 binary attributes at the same time. We can see that AC-StyleGAN is capable of controlling most
attributes. Some attributes are more difficult to change over interpolations, such Mustache on the female faces.
We argue that this is because these attributes have low frequency in the CelebA dataset.
19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.7 More results on only controlling a subset of factors in AC-StyleGAN
robot
x-move.
robot
y-move.
object
scale
lighting
y-dir
object
color
latent
Z
lighting
intensity
lighting
x-dir
camera
x-pos
(a)Isaac3D
(b) Falcor3D
Figure 16: Latent traversal results of AC-StyleGAN for only controlling a subset of factors on a) Isaac3D:
(robot x-movement, robot y-movement, object scale, lighting y-dir, object color), b) Falcor3D: (lighting inten-
sity, lighting x-dir, camera x-pos). The other factors in each dataset will be considered as random nuisances,
presumably captured by the latent z. We can see that the disentanglement quality and semantic correctness
are both getting worse instead. For example, interpolating the lighting intensity of Falcor3D also changes the
lighting directions and camera positions.
20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.8 More results on identifying fine-grained factors
object
shape
robot
x-move.
robot
y-move.
camera
height
object
scale
lighting
intensity
lighting
y-dir
object
color
wall
color
(a) φ = 8
object
shape
robot
x-move.
robot
y-move.
camera
height
object
scale
lighting
intensity
lighting
y-dir
object
color
wall
color
(b) φ = 64
Figure 17: Latent traversal results of FC-StyleGAN with full supervision on Isaac3D for all the factors where
we show different downscaled values φ ∈ {8, 64}. The factors that cannot be changed by the interpolations
(i.e., not fine-grained) are highlighted by blue boxes. For example, if φ = 8, only the camera height and
lighting y-dir are NOT fine-grained, while if φ = 64, only the lighting intensity and wall color are fine-grained.
Note that the results are consistent to those in Figure 4b.
21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.9 MORE RESULTS ON THE LATENT TRAVERSAL OF FC-STYLEGAN
object
scale
lighting
intensity
object
color
wall
color
Figure 18: Latent traversal of FC-StyleGAN With full supervision on Isaac3D for a subset of fine-grained
factors: (object scale, lighting intensity, object color, wall color). We can see that each factor changes smoothly
during its interpolation without affecting other factors, and the interpolated images in each row visually look
almost the same with their input image except the considered varying factor and another fine-grained factor:
object shape (as a random nuisance). Also, the image quality does not get worse during the interpolations.
lighting
intensity
lighting
x-dir
lighting
y-dir
lighting
z-dir
Figure 19: Latent traversal of FC-StyleGAN with full supervision on Falcor3D for all fine-grained factors:
(lighting intensity, lighting x-dir, lighting y-dir, lighting z-dir). We can see that each factor changes smoothly
during its interpolation without affecting other factors, and the interpolated images in each row visually look
almost the same with their input image except the considered varying factor. Also, the image quality does not
get worse during the interpolations.
22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.10 More results on THE impact of instance normalization in FC-STYLEGAN
lighting
intensity
object
color
wall
color
FID=8.17, MIG=0.990, l rec=O.10
(a) Impact of instance normalization
Figure 20: Comparison of FC-StyleGAN with instance normalization (top row) and without instance nor-
malization (bottom row). Both are trained with downscaled resolution φ = 32 on Isaac3D, where We only
disentangle a subset of fine factors (lighting intensity, object color, wall color). We can see that FC-StyleGAN
with instance normalization can smoothly change each of the factors of variation over interpolation. However,
FC-StyleGAN without instance normalization cannot change the lighting intensity and wall color at all.
23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.11 More results on THE generalization of FC-STYLEGAN
wall
color
(Φ = 16)
wall
color
(Φ = 32)
wall
color
(φ = 64)
(a) Interpolating the wall color
(b) Interpolating the lighting intensity
Figure 21: Generalization of FC-StyleGAN by varying the downscaled resolution φ and interpolating one
of the fine-grained factors. In the test image, We shift the robot position to the right-hand side, which is also
attached with an unseen object (i.e., octahedron). We can see that in FC-StyleGAN with different downscaled
resolutions, the considered factor keeps changing during its interpolations. Furthermore, the interpolated im-
ages in each case maintain the new robot position and particularly maintain new object shape (i.e., octahedron)
in the case of φ = 64. The reason why the new object shape is only maintained at φ = 64 is beacuse that the ob-
ject shape, together with the robot position, is not fine-grained at φ = 64 any more. Therefore, it demonstrates
that the disentanglement learning of FC-StyleGAN can generalize well to unseen novel test images.
24