DeepObfusCode: Source Code Obfuscation Through
Sequence-to-Sequence Networks
Siddhartha Datta
Abstract
The paper explores a novel methodology in source code obfuscation through the
application of text-based recurrent neural network network (RNN) encoder-decoder
models in ciphertext generation and key generation. Sequence-to-sequence models
are incorporated into the model architecture to generate obfuscated code, generate
the deobfuscation key, and live execution. Quantitative benchmark comparison
to existing obfuscation methods indicate significant improvement in stealth and
execution cost for the proposed solution, and experiments regarding the model’s
properties yield positive results regarding its character variation, dissimilarity to
the original codebase, and consistent length of obfuscated code.
1	Introduction
The field of code obfuscation has aimed to tackle reverse-engineering of code bases for years. The
entire basis of this methodology is that if a program is constructed with logic not easily recognizable
by a reader, the logic would be preserved intact and the software would be intrinsically protected.
Traditional tactics include creative uses of whitespace, redundant logical operations, unnecessary
conditional operations, amongst others. The common issue with obfuscation is that it can be reverse-
engineered, the only factor for a malicious actor would be the amount of time needed to discover the
logic. DeepObfusCode is a proposed methodology to use neural networks to convert the plaintext
source code into a cipher text by using the propagating architecture of neural networks to compound
the randomness factor in the creation of the ciphertext. Yet at the same time, neural networks have
the ability to learn statistical patterns and generate weights to convert one text to another, in our case
from the ciphertext to plaintext. This would eventually permit users to simply load the ciphertext and
the key to self-execute the program without foreign users viewing the inner workings of the code.
From an academic standpoint, this methodology redirects obfuscation methodology towards complete
obfuscation in contrary of incremental obfuscation, and suggests the usage and development of
asymmetric key infrastructure in obfuscation. Beyond sequence-to-sequence network models, further
obfuscation models could be built with greater degree of resilience, and other deep learning methods
could be harnessed to develop alternative techniques to obfuscate code. The methodology can be
adopted for more efficient, more effective obfuscation for developers protecting their proprietary
codebase or cloud computing services wishing to guarantee confidentiality to customers. The
algorithmic architecture could be further incorporated into larger frameworks or infrastructures to
render homomorphic encryption and ensure complete anonymity of the codebase during execution
from the execution provider.
2	Background
This section will detail existing code obfuscation methods being used, how they are evaluated, and
how modern deep learning techniques are being used in the area, while drawing comparison to the
proposed obfuscation implementation.
2.1	Code Obfuscation Methods
The objective of code obfuscation is to mask the computational processes and logic behind software
code, to protect trade secrets, intellectual property, or confidential data. As such, there have been eight
generalized methods behind code obfuscation [1], namely: (i) Name obfuscation; (ii) Data obfusca-
tion; (iii) Code flow obfuscation; (iv) Incremental obfuscation; (v) Intermediate code optimization;
(vi) Debug information obfuscation; (vi) Watermarking; (vii) Source code obfuscation. Source code
obfuscation, the focus of the paper, is the process that hides the meaning behind the source code,
in the case that a third party obtains the code that the code renders itself un-understandable. Under
each branch of obfuscation method, there are sub-techniques to reduce understandability of code
that are shared by the other obfuscation methods, including control ordering (changing the execution
order of program statements), control computation (changing the control flow of the program, such
as inserting dead code to increase code complexity), data aggregation (changing the access to data
structures after their conversion into other types), renamed identifiers (replacing identifiers with
meaningless strings as new identifiers to reduce readability and comprehension of what certain
functions or methods do). While existing methods tend to require manual altering of source code with
the aforementioned methods, the proposed method performs complete obfuscation with relatively
randomly generated characters as the code output. Malicious attackers or readers of the code will not
be able to reverse-engineer the code based on the readability of the obfuscated code, and a well-lodged
key file of the model weights (e.g. kept on the execution server) would prohibit de-obfuscation.
Existing methods of evaluating obfuscation techniques have tended towards qualitative surveys of
difficulty and time taken to de-obfuscate by students, software engineers or computer scientists [2].
To quantitatively compare the performance of the proposed source code obfuscation method against
existing code obfuscation methods, we will modify a framework that has been used to compare
obfuscation methods before [3], but also malleable enough for us to adapt for our specific comparison
use case. The four original comparison metrics are:
(i)	Code potency: This metric arbitrarily computes the degree of obfuscation with traditional com-
plexity measures, with specific focus on control flow and data obfuscation. An example of an
implementation would be frequency counts of misleading statements.
(ii)	Resilience: This metric measures the ability of the obfuscated text to withstand attacks from
automated tools.
(iii)	Stealth: This metric tests the difficulty in manual de-obfuscation by humans. It inherently
checks how quickly adversarial de-obfuscators can detect misdirecting statements, correctly interpret
supposedly-confusing identifiers, and tests their ability to uncover the logic and process behind the
code without prior or minimal knowledge of the program.
(iv)	Execution cost: This metric measures (i) the incremental time required to perform the obfusca-
tion, and (ii) the incremental time required to execute the obfuscated code. This would be contrasted
to the time taken for the original code without obfuscation.
Since the proposed obfuscation method generates a ciphertext completely different from the original
source text and cannot be reverse-engineered by manual human de-obfuscation, the former two
metrics (code potency and resilience) would not be used as comparison metrics for this method. The
main metrics for evaluating DeepObfusCode would be stealth and execution time.
2.2	Applications of Neural Networks
Neural networks have had recent applications in the field of cryptography and stenography. There
has been a recent implementation of style transfer in stenography [4], where secret images are
encrypted within a cover image, and the secret could be obtained by passing the encrypted image
through a secondary network. There is another implementation of n-dimensional convolutional
neural networks used to encrypt input data [5]. Another implementation involves the use of a
multilayer perception (MLP) model to encrypt satellite images, and decrypting using a secondary
MLP model [6]. Implementations on neural networks that can execute on encrpyted data has also
been a recent development [7]. This indicates a growing interest in encrypting data through the use of
neural networks. Unlike prior on data encryption through deep learning techniques, the proposed
architecture opens an alternative application, which is to encrypt source code itself through the use of
deep learning, then using the generated model file to decrypt and execute the code.
2
RNN Encoder-Decoders or sequence-to-sequence models, trained to predict an output text set from
provided input text, have had growing applications in statistical machine translation [8], grammatical
error correction [9], and text summarization [10]. The notion of taking input sentences and converting
them to labeled output sentences with a trained model of weights for character-by-character prediction
would be the basis for the proposed obfuscation method. The proposed obfuscation utilizes the
advantage of text-based encoder-decoders in character generation and calculating weights to convert
one string into another.
3	Proposed Solution
The architecture behind the obfuscation is first a primary recurrent neural network (RNN) encoder-
decoder model with randomly-set weights taking the original code text as an input to generate
the obfuscated text. Then a secondary RNN encoder-decoder model is passed two arguments, the
generated ciphertext and the original code as the corresponding label, and is trained for a number of
iterations to calculate weights to generate the original text, and the weights of the network would be
the key generated. This section will discuss the architecture and implementation in further detail.
3.1	Ciphertext generation
Figure 1: Overview of ciphertext generation. We pass the source code and a character set as inputs to
initialize both character sets for the encoder-decoder model, then randomly assign weights to generate
the ciphertext, an obfuscated version of the source code.
To generate the obfuscated code, we first take the original legible text (source code) and a full
character set (a string containing all characters, including letters, numbers and punctuation).
We perform text processing for both text strings to prepare the inputs for the encoder and decoder
models. First we create unique character sets for both strings, then create two dictionaries for both
strings to index each character (key is index and value is character), and create two other dictionaries
for both strings to return character given its index (key is character and value is index). Finally we
vectorize both strings.
We use the source code character set as inputs for the encoder model and both text character sets
for the decoder model. We will randomly generate weights for a given number of times n (the
randomness index; in our experiment we set n = 10), and set the model weights to be the generated
weights array. The variation in the weights array will determine the degree of randomness in the
ciphertext.
Weights generated will alter the character value generated for each segment of the string, as shown
in the Ciphertext Generation function C(p). c refers to the ciphertext (obfuscated code), p refers to
the plaintext (source code), N refers to each weight position. fn and wrand are the n-th feature and
randomized weight, respectively. Z(p) is a normalization constant that is independent of the weights.
N
C(p) = log p(c|p) =	wrandfn(c|p) + logZ(p)
n=1
3
The output will be the output sequence, to which we will decode by taking reference from the
index-to-character dictionary to convert the output sequence into an output character string and
iteratively append characters. The resulting output would be the ciphertext.
3.2	Key generation
Figure 2: Overview of key generation. With the known ciphertext and original source code, the
developer of the source code would pass them as inputs into another encoder-decoder model and train
over a number of iterations such that the model weights obtained can translate the obfuscated code
into executable code, with validation of executability at the end.
After generating the ciphertext, we use it along with the original source code plaintext to generate
a key. We apply the same text processing steps as before, set ciphertext as input into the encoder,
and both texts as inputs into the decoder, and train the model for a certain number of iteration counts.
For our experiments, we tended to use 2000 iterations, though Early Stopping mechanisms could
be used to lower training time for shorter source code; the iteration count should be the number of
iterations needed to ensure the output text is executable and identical to the source code text. After
the training and model weight setting process is complete, export the encoder and decoder model
files in HDF5 format (the key), and export the metadata (the dictionaries of index to char, and char to
index) in pickle format. The Key Generation function K(p, c) accepts the arguments c ciphertext
and p plaintext, and sets weights while minimizing the loss function. fn and wn are the n-th feature
and weight (after training), respectively. Z(c) is a normalization constant that is independent of the
weights.
1N
max N ElOgP(P∣c)
n=1
N
K(p,c) = lOg p(p|c) =	wnfn(p|c) +lOgZ(c)
n=1
After the ciphertext is decoded from the output sequence, we test if the code is executable; if it fails,
we retrain the model (a pre-determined loss threshold that ensures correct execution would facilitate
early stopping in iterative training); if it passes, the ciphertext and key pair are retained.
3.3	Source code execution
During live execution, we have three inputs: the obfuscated code (ciphertext), the key (model files),
and the metadata files; function K(c, k) would be modified to accept c ciphertext, and k model file
(along with metadata file). For our own experiments, the model and metadata files were separate; for
4
Figure 3: Overview of live execution. To run the obfuscated code on any server or system, one would
pass in the obfuscated code into an execution engine that takes the ciphertext and the lodged model
files as inputs to execute the withheld code.
execution in live systems, it would be possible to combine them into a single file if preferred. When
we pass all three through the model container, the output value is executed as soon as it is returned,
i.e. E xec(K (c, k)).
4	Evaluation
The evaluate the obfuscation method compared to existing obfuscation techniques, the method will be
tested on two aspects, stealth and execution cost. Other parameters such as code potency or resilience
would not be applicable to this method, as those comparison metrics require some form of the original
code to be preserved; but since this obfuscation method completely regenerates the code base to be
indistinguishable from the original code, such testing (e.g. searching for misleading control flow)
will not work.
4.1	Stealth
The objective of testing for the stealthiness of obfuscated code is to measure the complexity or
distance in randomness from the original code. Hence the logic behind our comparison is to first
obtain recognized well-obfuscated code and its deobfuscated copy (the original code), obfuscate
the original code using our proposed method, then compare the distance in similarity between the
original code and each of the obfuscated code.
Obfuscated code samples were obtained through the International Obfuscated C Code Contest
(IOCCC), and de-obfuscated code samples of the selected obfuscated code was found on forums.
The obfuscated samples were winners in the IOCCC contest, signifying high quality, and were
manually created by programmers. A total of five obfuscated-deobfuscated paired samples were used
for the experiment, which can be found in https: //github. com/dattasiddhartha- 1/dsource.
Obfuscated code of reputable, unbiased quality and its deobfuscated counterpart is generally difficult
to obtain in large samples; the aforementioned samples would be used in bench-marking and
comparison, but not for testing the inherent properties of the proposed architecture.
To test the obfuscation method extensively, for each de-obfuscated sample, we performed the
obfuscation to obtain the ciphertext for 100 iterations (to return 500 samples of obfuscated code
samples in total, 100 per de-obfuscated code sample).
Then we used Levenshtein Distance to measure the distance between two code samples; the distance
is the number of deletions, insertions, or substitutions required to transform the source string into the
target string. After calculating the Levenshtein Distance values between the original de-obfuscated
code and the IOCCC obfuscated code, we calculated the Levenshtein Distance values between the
original de-obfuscated code with each respective sample’s DeepObfusCode obfuscated code and took
the mean Levenshtein Distance for the sample. The results are tabulated in Table 1.
From the table, we can observe that in general the DeepObfusCode obfuscation has a greater degree
of randomness or dissimilarity from the original source text compared to the benchmark IOCCC
obfuscated text, with an average magnitude improvement of 1.2614 (the average of the ratio of
proposed:benchmark across all samples) and with a standard deviation 0.7176.
5
Table 1: Levenstein distance comparison
Deobfuscated Code Set	Benchmark Obfusca- tion	Lev. Distance	Proposed Ob- fuscation Lev. Distance	Ratio	of Proposed : Benchmark
~L	3061	4000.68687	1.30699
2	2587	497.17172	0.19218
3	42	102.81818	2.44805
4	4649	5780.32323	1.24335
5	9132	10195.40404	1.11645
Set 2 of the experiment indicates the benchmark outperforming the proposed method. Inspection
of set 2 reveals a greater proportion of repetitive characters as junk code insertions, which serve to
confuse de-obfuscators, but also dilute the similarity (conversely inflate the Levenstein distance) since
the proportion of overlapping characters to the total number of characters would be lower. While the
total collection indicates a general improvement in dissimilarity, removing set 2 would indicate an
average magnitude improvement of 1.5287 and a standard deviation of 0.5352. This aids in justifying
that the proposed obfuscation method performs well in the aspect of stealth.
4.2	Execution Cost
The primary focus of the section would be to measure how ciphertext generation time (time to
encrypt) and key generation time (time to decrypt) would vary with the length of the source code
(plaintext length).
The experimental design starts with the random generation of strings varying from length 1 to 4000
(to vary the plaintext length). Then we set loggers to record information regarding the six main
variables we would like to test: (i) Length of string input, (ii) Randomness metric (Levenshtein
distance), (iii) Execution time for encryption, (iv) Execution time for decryption, (v) Character
variation, (vi) Average character length of ciphertext. As execution time depends on the device
running the simulation, for reference, the simulation was run on a Python Jupyter notebook, running
on Windows 10 with a Nvidia Geforce 1070 GTX graphics card (running at 10% GPU usage level).
Plot of time taken to encrypt against plainte×tjength
8 6 4
ΛJUUloluxelUE-M
× × ×× × ××
××× vx
aΛJU"p o*ju*b"er
Plot of time_taken_to_decrypt against plainte×tjength
14000 -
12000 -
ιoooo -
8000-
6000-
4000-
2000-
o-
ooooooooo
oooooooo
momomomo
IlZZmm 寸
W
oooooooo
oooooooo
momomomo
IlZZmm 寸
Figure 4:	Plots of time properties against plaintext length
The plot of ciphertext generation time requirement against length of the source code shows no distinct
pattern, while the plot of key generation time requirement against length of the source code shows
a linear pattern. This infers that ciphertext generation is not length-dependent and can be executed
without significant incremental cost. Since the length of the source code affects the training time
required for the same number of iterations (higher length would increase training time per epoch),
longer source code would require more time to generate a key, so this obfuscation method may be
more suitable for smaller code bases or systems with sufficient computing resources. We can also
infer the key generation takes linear time, i.e. time complexity is O(n).
6
Beyond execution cost, this experiment yielded additional information regarding the properties of
this obfuscation model.
4000
3500
3000
8 2500
c
tt 2000
ω 1500
1000
500
0
Plot of levdistance against plaintext length
，。。。寸
,Oose
'OOOM
'00s
'OOOM
'002
，。。。1
'00Λ
'O
Figure 5:	Plot of similarity metric against plaintext length
Figure 5 adds onto prior Stealth results in section 4.1 to reveal that the larger the code base, the
greater the dissimilarity between the obfuscated code and the original code base.
Plot of CiPherteXti-CharaCteJVariatiOn against PlainteXUength
OOo-,
Ooom
OOSZ
OOON
OOSI
OoOI
OoS
0
uo-Lle>e.leul×9 七UdU
Plot of CiphertextJength against PlainteXUength
OOo-,
Ooom
OOSZ
OOON
OOSI
OoOI
OoS
0
Oooooooo
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
qu-J×9qdp
Figure 6:	Plots of ciphertext properties against plaintext length
Plotting ciphertext character variation and ciphertext length against plaintext length reveals: (i) the
character variation is widely distributed regardless of the length of the plaintext input, which further
supports the notion of randomness of ciphertext generation, as the ciphertext is based purely on
the randomness in the model weight generation; (ii) the ciphertext length is kept low (on average
72 character length) regardless of the plaintext length, which reduces obfuscated code storage
requirements. The notion that the cipher generation algorithm produces short random ciphertexts
further implies it would be difficult for malicious actors to reverse-engineer the ciphertext by setting
random weights or training a model without a known output text. For the model used in the experiment,
the model file consists of 3 layers of arrays: the main layer contains 8 arrays, of which each array has
an array-length as represented in [39, 256, 1024, 72, 256, 1024, 256, 72], of which each sub-array
(except the third and sixth array) contains an array of 1024 values. One would have to randomly
generate 32-bit floats for 975,872 values, at least to a proximate range to the actual values before they
can generate readable de-obfuscated code, but even then they would need to further generate values
to the 8th decimal place if they intend to obtain scrambled text without any lapse in meaning.
The correlation matrix in Figure 7 summarizes the relationships between the properties tested in the
experiment.
5 Conclusion
This paper presents a novel obfuscation methodology using RNN encoder-decoder models to generate
ciphertext from source code and generating and utilizing model weights as keys. Compared to current
7
plaintext-
length
1.0000
0.9994
0.1041
0.1692
0.90
Ievdi stance
0.75
0.9994
1.0000
0.1125
0.1917
ciphertext_
character
variation
0.60
0.1041
0.1125
1.0000
0.2539
-0.45
ciphertext_ _
length
-0.30
0.1692
0.1917
0.2539
1.0000
-0.15
plaintext- levdistance	CiPhertext_	ciphertext—
length - 一	CharaCter length -
variation
Figure 7:	Correlation matrix of properties
obfuscation methods, it is at least on par in terms of stealth and is expected to outperform for larger
code bases in terms of obscurity and readability, and though key generation may take a significant
amount of time for larger code bases or require more computational resources, it would be less
time-intensive than to manually obfuscate the source code. This would be a good use case application
for services that have confidential source code in plaintext but would prefer ciphertext yet require the
ability to execute.
References
[1]	Popa, M. (2011) Techniques of Program Code Obfuscation for Secure Software. Journal of Mobile,
Embedded and Distributed Systems
[2]	Viticchie, A. Regano, L. Torchiano, M. Basile, C. Ceccato, M. Tonella, P. & Tiella, R. (2017) Assessment
of Source Code Obfuscation Techniques. Retrieved from https:/∕arxiv. org/pdf/1704.02307.pdf
[3]	Schneider, J. & Locher, T. (2016) Obfuscation using Encryption. Retrieved from https: /∕arxiv. org∕
pdf/1612.03345.pdf
[4]	Baluja, S. (2017) Hiding Images in Plain Sight: Deep Steganography. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems
[5]	Benoit, S. (2018) ConvCrypt. Retrieved from https: / / git hub. com/ santient/convcrypt
[6]	Ismail, A. Galal-Edeen, H. Khattab, S. Mohamed, A.E. & Bahtity, M.E. (2012) Satellite image encryption
using neural networks backpropagation. International Conference on Computer Theory and Applications
[7]	Hesamifard, E. Takabi, H. & Ghasemi, M. (2017) CryptoDL: Deep Neural Networks over Encrypted Data.
Retrieved from https: /∕arxiv. org∕pdf∕17H .05189.pdf
[8]	Cho, K. Merrienboer, B.V. Gulcehre, C. Bahdanau, D. Bougares, F. Schwenk, H. & Bengio, Y. (2014)
Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. Retrieved
from https: /∕arxiv. org/pdf/1406.1078.pdf
[9]	Ahmadi, S. (2018) Attention-based Encoder-Decoder Networks for Spelling and Grammatical Error
Correction. Retrieved from https: /∕arxiv. org/pdf/1810.00660. pdf
[10]	Khatri, C. Singh, G. Parikh, N. (2018) Abstractive and Extractive Text Summarization using Document
Context Vector and Recurrent Neural Networks. KDD Deep Learning Day
8