Figure 1: KnockoffGAN Block Diagram4.1	GeneratorThe generator, G, will be a function G(∙, ∙; φ) : X X [0,1]c → X, parametrized by φ that takes arealization X of X and random noise, Z 〜U([0,1]c), as inputs and outputs knockoff features x. Wedefine X := G(X, z). We model G as a fully connected neural network with weights φ.
Figure 2: Comparison of KnockoffGAN With the benchmarks for X distributed as an auto-regressive distribu-tion With Gaussian marginal distributions. TPR is used to quantify performance and FDR is reported to verifythat it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 3: Comparison of KnockoffGAN with the benchmarks forX distributed as a 4-mixture Gaussian mixturemodel. TPR is used to quantify performance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold(10%).
Figure 4: A comparison of the performance of KnoCkoffGAN With and without the WGAN regularize] for Xdistributed as an auto-regressive distribution with U(一，3/n, ʌ/ɛ/n) marginal distributions. TPR is used toquantify performance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 5: Comparison of KnockoffGAN with the benchmarks for X 〜N(0,11n). TPR is used to quantifyperformance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 6: Comparison of KnockoffGAN with the benchmarks for X 〜U(—,3/n,，3/n). TPR is used toquantify performance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 7: Comparison of KnoCkoffGAN With the benchmarks for X 〜 DiriChlet(1,…，1). TPR is used toquantify performance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 8: Comparison of KnoCkoffGAN With the benchmarks for X 〜GMM2. TPR is used to quantifyperformance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 9: Comparison of KnoCkoffGAN With the benchmarks for X 〜GMM3. TPR is used to quantifyperformance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold (10%).
Figure 10: A comparison of the performance of KnockoffGAN for X distributed as an auto-regressive distribu-tion with Gaussian marginal distributions. TPR is used to quantify performance and FDR is reported to verifythat it is at the specified threshold (5%).
Figure 11: A comparison of the performance of KnockoffGAN for X distributed as an auto-regressive distribu-tion with Uniform marginal distributions. TPR is used to quantify performance and FDR is reported to verifythat it is at the specified threshold (5%).
Figure 12: A comparison of the performance of KnockoffGAN for X distributed as 4-mixture Gaussian mixturemodel. TPR is used to quantify performance and FDR is reported to verify that it is at the specified threshold(5%).
