Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Emergent Translation
in Multi-Agent Communication
Jason Lee*
New York University
jason@cs.nyu.edu
Kyunghyun Cho
New York University
Facebook AI Research
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu
Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research
jase@fb.com
Douwe Kiela
Facebook AI Research
dkiela@fb.com
Ab stract
While most machine translation systems to date are trained on large parallel cor-
pora, humans learn language in a different way: by being grounded in an environ-
ment and interacting with other humans. In this work, we propose a communi-
cation game where two agents, native speakers of their own respective languages,
jointly learn to solve a visual referential task. We find that the ability to understand
and translate a foreign language emerges as a means to achieve shared goals. The
emergent translation is interactive and multimodal, and crucially does not require
parallel corpora, but only monolingual, independent text and corresponding im-
ages. Our proposed translation model achieves this by grounding the source and
target languages into a shared visual modality, and outperforms several baselines
on both word-level and sentence-level translation tasks. Furthermore, we show
that agents in a multilingual community learn to translate better and faster than in
a bilingual communication setting.
1	Introduction
Building intelligent machines that can converse with humans is a longstanding challenge in artificial
intelligence. Remarkable successes have been achieved in natural language processing (NLP) via
the use of supervised learning approaches on large-scale datasets (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2016; Gehring et al., 2017; Sennrich et al., 2017). Machine translation is no exception: most trans-
lation systems are trained to derive statistical patterns from huge parallel corpora. Parallel corpora,
however, are expensive and difficult to obtain for many language pairs. This is especially the case
for low resource languages, where parallel texts are often small or nonexistent. We address these
issues by designing a multi-agent communication task, where agents interact with each other in their
own native languages and try to work out what the other agent meant to communicate. We find that
the ability to translate foreign languages emerges as a means to achieve a common goal.
Aside from the benefit of not requiring parallel data, we argue that our approach to learning to trans-
late is also more natural than learning from large corpora. Humans learn languages by interacting
with other humans and referring to their shared environment, i.e., by being grounded in physical
reality. More abstract knowledge is built on top of this concrete foundation. It is natural to use
vision as an intermediary: when communicating with someone who does not speak our language,
we often directly refer to our surroundings. Even linguistically distant languages will, by physical
and cognitive necessity, still refer to scenes and objects in the same visual space.
We compare our model against a number of baselines, including a nearest neighbor method and a
recently proposed model (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017) that maps languages and images to a shared
space, but lacks communication. We evaluate performance on both word- and sentence-level trans-
lation, and show that our model outperforms the baselines in both settings. Additionally, we show
* Work done while the author was interning at Facebook AI Research.
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
that multilingual communities of agents, comprised of native speakers of different languages, learn
faster and ultimately become better translators.
2	Prior Work
Recent work has used neural networks and reinforcement learning in multi-agent settings to solve a
variety of tasks with communication, including simple coordination (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016), logic
riddles (Foerster et al., 2016), complex coordination with verbal and physical interaction (Lowe
et al., 2017), cooperative dialogue (Das et al., 2017) and negotiation (Lewis et al., 2017).
At the same time, there has been a surge of interest in communication protocols or languages that
emerge from multi-agent communication in solving these various tasks. Lazaridou et al. (2017)
first showed that simple neural network agents can learn to coordinate in an image referential game
with single-symbol bandwidth. This work has been extended to induce communication protocols
that are more similar to human language, allowing multi-turn communication (Jorge et al., 2016),
adaptive communication bandwidth (Havrylov & Titov, 2017) and multi-turn communication with
a variable-length conversation (Evtimova et al., 2017), and simple compositionality (Kottur et al.,
2017; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017). Meanwhile, Andreas et al. (2017) proposed a model to interpret
continuous message vectors by “translating” them.
Our work is related to a long line of work on learning multimodal representations. Several ap-
proaches proposed to learn a joint space for images and text using Canonical Correlation Analysis
(CCA) or its variants (Hodosh et al., 2013; Andrew et al., 2013; Chandar et al., 2016). Other works
minimize pairwise ranking loss to learn multimodal embeddings (Socher et al., 2014; Kiros et al.,
2014; Ma et al., 2015; Vendrov et al., 2015; Kiela et al., 2017). Most recently, others extended
this work to learn joint representations between images and multiple languages (Gella et al., 2017;
Calixto et al., 2017b; Rajendran et al., 2016).
In machine translation, our work is related to image-guided (Calixto et al., 2017a; Elliott & Kadar,
2017; Caglayan et al., 2016) and pivot-based (Firat et al., 2016; Hitschler et al., 2016) approaches.
It is also related to previous work on multiagent translation for low-resource language pairs (with-
out grounding) (He et al., 2016a). At word-level, there has been work on translation via a visual
intermediate (Bergsma & Van Durme, 2011), including with convolutional neural network features
(Kiela et al., 2015; Joulin et al., 2016).
It was recently shown that zero-resource translation is possible by separately learning an image
encoder and a language decoder (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017). The main difference to our work is
that their models do not perform communication.
3	Task and Models
3.1	Communication Task
We let two agents communicate with each other in their own respective languages to solve a visual
referential task. One agent sees an image and describes it in its native language to the other agent.
The other agent is given several images, one of which is the same image shown to the first agent,
and has to choose the correct image using the description. The game is played in both directions
simultaneously, and the agents are jointly trained to solve this task. We only allow agents to send a
sequence of discrete symbols to each other, and never a continuous vector.
Our task is similar to Lazaridou et al. (2017), but with the following differences: communication (1)
is bidirectional and (2) of variable length; (3) the speaker is trained on both the listener’s feedback
and ground-truth annotations; and (4) the speaker only observes the target image and no distractors.
Let PA and PB be our agents, who speak the languages LA and LB respectively. We have two
disjoint sets of image-annotation pairs: (IA, MA) in language LA and (IB, MB) in language LB.
Task in language LA : PA is the speaker and PB is the listener.
1.	A target image and annotation (i, m) ∈ {IA, MA} is drawn from the training set in LA.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
2.	Given i, the speaker (PA) produces a sequence of symbols m in language LA to describe
the image and sends it to the listener. The speaker’s goal is to produce a message that is
both an accurate prediction of the ground-truth annotation m, and helps the listener (PB)
identify the target image.
3.	K - 1 distracting images are drawn from IA at random. The target image i is added to this
set and all K images are shuffled.
4.	Given the message τm and the K images, the listener,s goal is to identify the target image.
Task with language LB : The agents exchange the roles and play similarly.
We explore two different settings: (1) a word-level task where the agents communicate with a single
word, and (2) a sentence-level task where agents can transmit a sequence of symbols.
3.2	Model Architecture and Training
Each agent has an image encoder, a native speaker module and a foreign language encoder. In
English-Japanese communication, for instance, the English-speaking agent PA consists of an image
encoder EIAMG, a native English speaker module SEAN, and a Japanese encoder EJAA . Similarly, the
Japanese-speaking agent PB = (EIBMG, SJBA, EEBN).
(a) Communication task.
青 l>' I ■ <<-
Z)< 门 ■ I -
空・ I I ―
softmax T
Agent Pb
JA speaker
(b) Translation.
Figure 1: Sentence-level communication task and translation between English and Japanese. (a) The red dotted
line delimits the agents and the gray dotted line delimits the communication tasks for different languages.
Representations residing in the multimodal space of Agent A and B are shown in green and yellow, respectively.
(b) An illustration of how the Japanese agent might translate an unseen English sentence to Japanese.
We now illustrate the architecture of our model using the English part of the communication task as
an example (upper half of Figure 1a). We first describe the sentence-level model.
Speaker (PA) Given an image-annotation pair (i, m) ∈ {IEN, MEN} sampled from the English
training set, let i be represented as a Dimg-dimensional vector. PA ’s speaker encodes i into a Dhid-
dimensional vector with a feedforward image encoder: h0 = EIAMG(i).
Our speaker module SEAN is a recurrent neural network (RNN) with gated recurrent units (GRU, (Cho
et al., 2014)). Our RNN takes the image representation h0 as initial hidden state and updates its
state as ht+1 = GRU(ht , mt) where mt is the t-th token in m. The output layer projects each
hidden state ht over the English vocabulary VEN, followed by a softmax to predict the next token:
pt = softmax(Woht + bo). The speaker’s predictions are trained on the ground truth English
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
annotation m using the cross entropy loss:
1	{IEN ,MEN } Tm
JsEN = -T7-	E Elog p(mtlm(<t),i),
NEN	(i,m)	t=1
where NEN is the size of the English training set, and Tm is the length of m.
To generate a sequence of tokens, we sample from the categorical distribution Cat(pt). However,
sampling is a non-differentiable computation. To allow our model to be end-to-end differentiable,
we use the straight-through Gumbel-softmax estimator (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017) to
sample from Cat(pt) and let the gradient flow, while the speaker sends a sequence of discrete sym-
bols.1 The message m is a sequence of one-hot vectors: m = {yt}T=「where yt = Gumbel_ST(Pt)
is discretized in the forward pass.
Listener (PB) The Japanese-speaking agent PB encodes the K images into Dhid-dimensional
multimodal space with its own feedforward image encoder: {EIBMG(ik)}kK=1. It also feeds each token
from m into its English encoder RNN with Dhid-dimensional hidden states: st+ι = GRU(st, mt).
Taking the last hidden state, the representation of m is a Dhid-dimensional vector: EEN(τ^) = STm.
Note, that encodings of the images and the message have the same dimensionality.
To encourage the listener to align the message representation closest to the target image, it is trained
using a cross entropy loss where the logits are given by the reciprocal of the mean squared error
(MSE) between the target image and the message representation: {1/(EEN(m) - EIMG(ik)) }3r
log softmax
(1/(EBN(m) - EIMG⑺
(1)
where the softmax operation is performed over K images. We observed that optimization signifi-
cantly slows down after the initial stage of learning when training with the standard MSE loss. In
order to ensure fast convergence throughout training, we use this modified form of MSE as a loss
function whose slope gets steeper as the loss is minimized. See Appendix A for a discussion and a
more thorough comparison and analysis.
Training These two agents are jointly trained by minimizing the sum of speaker and listener loss:
J
(Jsxpk + Jlsxn).
x∈{EN,JA}
Note that the listener is only trained on Jlsn, while the speaker is trained on both Jlsn and Jspk.
Word-level model The word-level model has a similar architecture to the sentence-level one: in-
stead of an RNN, the speaker module SEAN is a feedforward layer that projects h0 over the native
vocabulary. We again use a straight-through Gumbel-softmax to sample a one-hot vector. Similarly,
the foreign language encoder consists simply of the Dhid-dimensional foreign word embeddings.
General training details In both word- and sentence-level experiments, we use 2048-dimensional
pre-softmax features from a pre-trained ResNet with 50 layers (He et al., 2016b), instead of raw im-
ages. Our models are trained using stochastic gradient descent with the Adam optimizer (Kingma &
Ba, 2014). The norm of the gradient is clipped with a threshold of 1 (Pascanu et al., 2013). Gumbel-
softmax temperature is tuned on the validation set, but fixed throughout training, not annealed or
learned.
3.3 How Translation Arises
To translate an English sentence msrc to Japanese, we let the Japanese-speaking agent PB encode
msrc with its English encoder, and decode this representation using its Japanese speaker module:
1We also trained our models with REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) in our preliminary experiments, but found
it to converge much slower than Gumbel-softmax relaxation.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
mhyp = SJBA(EEBN(msrc)) (see Figure 1b). Solving the image referential task requires aligning the
foreign (source) sentence representation with the representation of the correct image, which will
allow the speaker module to describe the source sentence in its native (target) language, as though it
were an image.
4 Word-level Experiments
Task and dataset We train our model on a word-level communication task, where the agent PA
is given an image and needs to find the right word to communicate it so that the agent PB can pick
the right image from a set of distractors. We use the Bergsma500 dataset (Bergsma & Van Durme,
2011), a collection of up to 20 image search results per concept and language, for 500 common
concepts across 6 languages: English, Spanish, German, French, Italian and Dutch. We train on 80%
of the images, and choose the model with the best communication accuracy on the 20% validation
set when reporting translation performance. As the Bergsma500 is an extremely small dataset,
we do not have a separate test set to report the communication accuracy on. We only report the
translation performance instead. Note that the translation task involves translating 500 words from
the vocabulary, therefore the data split of images is not relevant for this task.
Baselines For our baselines, we use a variety of nearest neighbor methods based on similarity
metrics in the ConvNet feature space (Kiela et al., 2015). Given a set of 20 ResNet image vectors
per concept and language, we can either average them (CNN-Mean) or take the dimension-wise
maximum (CNN-Max) to derive a single aggregated image vector. To find the German word for dog,
for instance, we rank all German words based on cosine similarity between the image vector of dog
and their image vectors. We then examine precision in retrieving the correct German word, Hund.
Alternatively, we also consider the similarities between individual image vectors instead of their
aggregation: Bergsma & Van Durme (2011) propose taking the average of the maximum similarity
scores (CNN-AvgMax) and the maximum of the maximum similarity scores (CNN-MaxMax).
Experimental settings We train with 1 distractor (K = 2)2, learning rate 3e-4, and minibatch
size 128. The embedding and hidden state dimensionalities are set to 400. When the validation
accuracies of both the speaker and the listener stop improving, training terminates and we evaluate
the performance on the word-level translation task, as described in § 3.3. We consider all 15 language
pairs in both directions, reporting results averaged across 30 translation cases.
Results In all 15 language pairs, we observe that translation performance improves with com-
munication performance (Figure 3). In translation, our model outperforms all the nearest neighbor
baselines (Table 2). This shows that our agents can learn foreign word representations that are not
only effective in solving referential tasks, but also more meaningful than raw image features in
translation. It also demonstrates that communication helps to identify and learn correspondences
between concepts in different languages.
Model	P@1	P@5	P@20
CNN-AvgMax	53.00	68.30	78.36
CNN-MaxMax	49.85	65.91	77.17
CNN-Mean	51.89	66.47	77.14
CNN-Max	33.81	50.62	65.81
Our model	56.39	70.43	79.19
Figure 2: Word-level translation results, in precision at k .
Results are averaged over 30 translation cases (15 two-way
pairs).
Figure 3: Learning curve for the EN-DE
word-level model.
Qualitative analysis As our agents learn foreign words by grounding them in visual space, we
expect the learned foreign word embeddings tobe semantically similar to corresponding images. We
inspect the nearest neighbors of foreign word embeddings in each language, and find that concepts
2We experimented with more distractors, but found this setting to be optimal. See Appendix D for a discus-
sion.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
with similar images indeed have close word embeddings. See Appendix B for a discussion and
relevant examples.
5	Sentence-level Experiments
Task We next train our models on a sentence-level communication task where agent PA is given
an image, and needs to communicate its content in a sentence in its language LA to allow agent PB
to identify the right image from a set of distractors (see §3.1).
Datasets and preprocessing We use three datasets of images with annotations in multiple lan-
guages. The Multi30k (Elliott et al., 2016) dataset contains 30k images and two types of bilingual
annotations for two different tasks:
•	(Task 1) English-German translation task, where this can be aided by images; and
•	(Task 2) German image captioning task, where this can be helped with English captions.
Training data for Task 1 consists of 1 English caption and its German translation for every image,
translated by a professional translator. For Task 2, five English and five German captions are col-
lected independently for every image. We use the original data split: 29k training, 1k validation and
1k test images.
We experiment with another language pair: English-Japanese. We use MS COCO (Lin et al.,
2014; Chen et al., 2015), which contains 120k images and 5 English captions per image, and
STAIR (Yoshikawa et al., 2017), a collection of Japanese annotations of the same dataset (also 5
per image). Following Karpathy & Li (2015), we use 110k training, 5k validation and 5k test im-
ages.
To ensure no parallel corpus is used to train our models, we partition the images in the training
set into two parts (one for each langauge) and only use captions in one language for each half and
not the other. With Multi30k, for instance, we have 14.5k English training images (whose German
captions we discard) and 14.5k German training images.
We use tokenized Japanese captions in STAIR.3 We lowercase, normalize and tokenize English
and German captions using preprocessing scripts from Moses.4 In addition, we tokenize German
captions into subword symbols using the byte pair encoding (BPE) algorithm with 10k merge oper-
ations (Sennrich et al., 2015).
Baselines We compare against several baselines that similarly only make use of disjoint image-
description data. In increasing order of sophistication:
Nearest neighbor To translate an English sentence into German, we use its corresponding image to
find the closest image in our German training set. We then retrieve all corresponding German
captions and compute BLEU score against the ground truth German test captions. This model
is similar to our word-level nearest neighbor baselines.
NMT with neighboring pairs Given our non-aligned training set of English and German image
captions, without any overlapping images, we can form new EN-DE sentence pairs by find-
ing the closest German training image for every English training image. We then pair every
corresponding German caption with every corresponding English caption, and train a stan-
dard NMT model without attention (Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014) on these pairs.
We do not compare against an NMT model with attention because our models do not use
attention (since incorporating attention would mean that agents have access to each other’s
hidden states, which is no longer a multi-agent setting).
N&N We implement and train end-to-end models from (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017). Their two-
way model learns separate encoders to align the source language and images in a multimodal
space. Then, a captioning model in the target language is trained on image representations,
and is used to decode source representations to translate them. Their three-way models
3https://github.com/STAIR-Lab-CIT/STAIR-captions
4https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
align both soUrce and target langUages with images Using a target langUage encoder. Their
models are similar to oUr models, with two key differences: (1) they are trained on a fixed
corpUs, withoUt interaction between agents or learned commUnication, and (2) their model
Unit-normalizes the oUtpUt of every encoder and is trained on pairwise ranking loss. In or-
der to specifically examine the effectiveness of commUnication in learning to translate, we
train these baselines Using both their original loss fUnction and oUr own loss fUnction (see
Appendix A).
Models In oUr base model, the agents learn to speak their native langUages simUltaneoUsly as they
learn to commUnicate with each other (not pretrained). In a sense, this can be seen as a tabula rasa
sitUation where both agents start from a blank slate. However, we also experiment with agents who
already speak their langUages, by Using the weights from pretrained image captioning models in both
langUages to initialize oUr speaker modUles and image encoders. FUrthermore, we can freeze the
parameters of image encoders or speaker modUles to investigate their impact on commUnication and
translation performance. In the most extreme case, where we pretrain and fix the speaker modUles
and image encoders (pretrained, spk & enc fixed), we only train the foreign langUage encoder,
Using only the listener loss. All other models are trained on both the speaker and listener loss.
Experimental settings We train with 1 distractor (K = 2)5 and minibatch size 64. The hidden
state size and embedding dimensionalities are 1024 and 512, respectively. The learning rate and
dropoUt rate are tUned on the validation set for each task. The vocabUlary sizes of each langUage
Used in oUr experiments are: EN (4k) and DE (5K) for MUlti30k Task 1, EN (8k) and DE (13k) for
MUlti30k Task2 and EN (10k) and JP (13k) for MS COCO.
We train the model on the commUnication task, and early stop when the validation translation BLEU
score stops improving. We Use beam search at inference time, with beam width tUned on the valida-
tion set.
MUlti30k Task 1 MUlti30k Task 2 COCO & STAIR
EN-DE DE-EN EN-DE DE-EN EN-JA JA-EN
Nearest neighbor	1.41	1.77	3.75	5.87	15.88	10.94
NMT with neighboring pairs	3.07	3.41	6.83	14.78	32.17	22.39
SSOIJ-≡qH- SSOl ⅛0
senilesaB
sledoM dengilan
N&N, 2-way, img	2.57	2.69	5.22	12.78	28.68	20.61
N&N, 3-way, img	2.01	3.51	6.19	14.60	29.81	21.25
N&N, 3-way, desc	3.34	3.87	9.66	15.96	27.53	17.51
N&N, 3-way, both	1.50	3.62	9.89	15.50	31.01	20.59
N&N, 2-way, img	4.20	6.04	11.95	17.22	33.10	23.43
N&N, 3-way, img	2.32	5.91	11.62	17.84	32.11	23.61
N&N, 3-way, desc	5.13	6.02	11.07	17.01	26.65	17.82
N&N, 3-way, both	4.89	6.59	13.53	18.48	32.84	23.28
SIəpouɪ JnO
not pretrained	5.80	7.20	14.81	17.70	33.26	23.66
pretrained, spk & enc fixed	5.81	7.36	13.87	18.68	35.25	24.61
pretrained, spk fixed	6.49	7.42	14.93	19.81	33.01	23.59
pretrained, not fixed	5.02	6.06	13.44	17.41	33.58	23.19
Aligned NMT	17.21	16.65	19.99	21.44	38.55	28.36
Table 1: Test BLEU scores for each model and dataset. The best performing (unaligned) model for each dataset
is shown in bold. We show the results of baselines from (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017) using two different
loss functions (Appendix A). Pretrained denotes initializing the speaker modules and image encoders with
pretrained image captioning models. Fixed denotes fixing the parameters of either the speaker module or the
image encoder.
Results We find that naively looking UP the nearest training image and retrieving its captions gives
relatively poor BLEU scores (Table 1, Nearest neighbor). On the other hand, training an NMT model
on these visUally closest neighbor pairs gives mUch better translation performance.
5See Appendix D for a discUssion on the nUmber of distractors.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
From the results of baselines from (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017), it is clear that our loss function
gives better performance than the pairwise ranking loss with unit-normalized encoder outputs. We
note that these baselines perform worse than our models even when our loss function is used, an
indication that communication helps in learning to translate. We conjecture that our listeners become
better at aligning multimodal representations compared to these baselines, as our listeners are trained
on speaker’s output, and hence are exposed to a bigger and more diverse set of image descriptions.
In contrast, the N&N models only make use of the ground truth captions. We also note that their
3-way models have an additional encoder for the target language, which our models lack. Although
this is not used at test time, their 3-way models have 33% more parameters to train (97m) than our
models (73m).
In contrast to (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017), where the best performance was obtained with end-
to-end trained models, we find that our models benefit from initializing weights with pretrained
captioning models. The model with fixed speaker modules and non-fixed image encoders gave
best results in two out of three datasets, even outperforming the (spk & enc fixed) model, which
only produces messages that are trained to predict ground truth captions. This shows that learning
to send messages differently from the pretrained image captioning models achieves better transla-
tion performance than learning to send ground truth captions. We provide sample translations for
our baselines and models in Appendix C. We also qualitatively examine completely zero-resource
German-Japanese translation in Appendix F.
We compare our results with a standard non-attentional NMT model trained on parallel data (Cho
et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014). On COCO & STAIR, we observe a gap of approximately 4
BLEU compared to our best models On Multi30k Task 2, which is slightly smaller, the gap grows
up to 5 BLEU scores. On Multi30k Task 1, where the dataset is the smallest and also of the highest
quality (annotated by professional translators), the gap is around 11 BLEU. In other words, we find
that our approach performs closer to supervised NMT as more training data is available, but that
there still is a gap, which is unsurprising given the lack of parallel data.
Qualitative analysis We conjecture that our models learn to translate by having a shared visual
space to ground source and target languages onto. Indeed, we show that our translation system
fails without a common visual modality (see Appendix D). We note that using a larger number of
distractors helps the model learn faster initially, but does not affect translation performance (see also
Appendix D).
As expected, our models struggle with translating abstract sentences, although we observe that they
can capture some visual elements in the source sentence (see Appendix E). This observation applies
to most current grounded NMT systems, and it is an avenue worth exploring in future work but
beyond the scope of the current work.
Inspired by the movie Arrival (2016), we show that our agents can learn to play the referential game,
and learn to translate, using an alien language (Klingon) with only a small number of captions (see
Appendix G). This example is meant to illustrate the point that our models can learn to translate
even in situations where there is no knowledge whatsoever of the other language, and where training
a professional translator would potentially take a long time.
6	Multilingual Community of Agents
Task and dataset Humans learn to speak languages within communities. We next investigate
whether we can learn to translate better in a community of different language speakers, where every
agent interacts with every other agent. We use the recently released multilingual Multi30k Task 1,
which contains annotations in English, German and French for 30k images (Elliott et al., 2017). We
train a community of three agents (each speaking one language) and let each agent learn the other
two languages simultaneously.
We again partition the set of images into two halves (M1 and M2 in Figure 4), and ensure that
the speaker and the listener do not see the same set of images (see Figure 4a for example). We
experiment with two different settings: 1) a full community model, where having a multilingual
community allows us to expose agents to more data than in the single-pair model while maintaining
disjoint sets of images between agents (Figure 4c); and 2) a fair community model where the agents
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
are trained on exactly the same number of training examples (Figure 4b). We point out that the
difference in training data should mainly affect the speaker module; the image encoder and foreign
language encoder are trained on the same number of examples in all the models.
(a) Single
(b) Fair
(c) Full
Figure 4: Training data in single-pair and community models. M1_EN denotes the English annotations for
the first half images in Multi30k. Red and blue indicate training data for the English and the German agents’
speaker modules, respectively. Note that compared to the single pair model, English and German speakers see
twice the amount of training data in the full model, but see the same number of examples in the fair model.
Experimental settings We train our base model (not pretrained) on a
three-way sentence-level communication task. We sample a language
pair with an equal probability every minibatch and let the two agents
communicate. Every agent has one image encoder, one native speaker
module and two foreign language encoders. We tokenize every corpus
using BPE with 10k merge operations. We use the same architecture
for the three models: Demb = 128, Dhid = 256 and we use a learning
rate of 3e-4 and batch size of 128.
Figure 5: DE-EN learning
curve for different models.
Model	EN-DE	DE-EN	EN-FR	FR-EN	DE-FR	FR-DE
Single	3.85	5.36	5.20	5.87	4.31	3.92
Fair	3.73	5.56	4.81	5.96	5.08	4.00
Full	4.83	7.21	7.09	8.10	6.55	5.15
Table 2: Multi30k Task 1 Test BLEU scores. Results should be compared with the first two columns in Table 1.
Results We observe that multilingual communities learn better translations. By having access to
more target-side data, the full community model achieves the best translation performance in every
language pair (Table 2). The fair community model achieves comparable performance to the single
pair model.
We show the learning curves of different models in Figure 5. The full community model clearly
learns much faster than the other two. The fair community also learns faster than the single-pair
model, as it learns with equivalent speed but with less exposure to individual language pairs, since
we sample a language pair for each batch, rather than always having the same one.
7	Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we have shown that the ability to understand a foreign language, and to translate it in
the agent’s native language, can emerge from a communication task. We argue that this setting is
natural, since humans learn language in a similar way: by trying to understand other humans while
being grounded in a shared environment.
We empirically confirm that the capability to translate is facilitated by the fact that agents have a
shared visual modality they can refer to in their respective languages. Our experiments show that
our model outperforms recently proposed baselines where agents do not communicate, as well as
several nearest neighbor based baselines, in both sentence- and word-level scenarios.
In future work, we plan to examine how we can enrich our agents with the ability to understand and
translate abstract language, possibly through multi-task learning.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Acknowledgement
KC thanks support by eBay, TenCent, Facebook, Google and NVIDIA. We thank our colleagues
from FAIR for helpful discussions.
References
Jacob Andreas, Anca D. Dragan, and Dan Klein. Translating neuralese. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting ofthe Associationfor Computational Linguistics, pp. 232-242, 2017.
Galen Andrew, Raman Arora, Jeff A. Bilmes, and Karen Livescu. Deep canonical correlation anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013,
Atlanta, GA, USA, 16-21 June 2013, pp. 1247-1255, 2013.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2015.
Shane Bergsma and Benjamin Van Durme. Learning bilingual lexicons using the visual similarity
of labeled web images. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1764-1769, 2011.
Ozan Caglayan, Lolc Barrault, and Fethi Bougares. Multimodal attention for neural machine trans-
lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03976, 2016.
Iacer Calixto, Qun Liu, and Nick Campbell. Doubly-attentive decoder for multi-modal neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 1913-1924, 2017a.
Iacer Calixto, Qun Liu, and Nick Campbell. Multilingual multi-modal embeddings for natural lan-
guage processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01101, 2017b.
Sarath Chandar, Mitesh M. Khapra, Hugo Larochelle, and Balaraman Ravindran. Correlational
neural networks. Neural Computation, 28(2):257-285, 2016.
Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and
C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO captions: Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1504.00325, 2015.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. On the properties
of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder approaches. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop
on Syntax, Semantics, and Structure in Statistical Translation, pp. 103-111, 2014.
Grzegorz Chrupala, Akos Kadar, and Afra AIiShahi. Learning language through pictures. In Pro-
ceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 112-
118, 2015.
Abhishek Das, Satwik KOttUr,Jose M. F. Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Learning cooperative
visual dialog agents with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06585, 2017.
Desmond Elliott and Akos Kadar. Imagination improves multimodal translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.04350, 2017.
Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and Lucia Specia. Multi30k: Multilingual english-
german image descriptions. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pp.
70-74, 2016.
Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, LOic Barrault, Fethi Bougares, and Lucia Specia. Findings of the
second shared task on multimodal machine translation and multilingual image description. In
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation, pp. 215-233, 2017.
Katrina Evtimova, Andrew Drozdov, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. Emergent language in a
multi-modal, multi-step referential game. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10369, 2017.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Orhan Firat, Baskaran Sankaran, Yaser Al-Onaizan, Fatos T. Yarman-Vural, and Kyunghyun Cho.
Zero-resource translation with multi-lingual neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016, Austin,
Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016, pp. 268-277, 2016.
Jakob N. Foerster, Yannis M. Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning to com-
municate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pp. 2137-2145, 2016.
Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. Convolutional
sequence to sequence learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 1243-1252, 2017.
Spandana Gella, Rico Sennrich, Frank Keller, and Mirella Lapata. Image Pivoting for Learning
Multilingual Multimodal Representations. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2829-2835, 2017.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to com-
municate with sequences of symbols. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations Workshop Track, 2017.
Di He, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Liwei Wang, Nenghai Yu, Tieyan Liu, and Wei-Ying Ma. Dual learning
for machine translation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 820-828,
2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
770-778, 2016b.
Julian Hitschler, Shigehiko Schamoni, and Stefan Riezler. Multimodal pivots for image caption
translation. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2016.
Micah Hodosh, Peter Young, and Julia Hockenmaier. Framing image description as a ranking task:
Data, models and evaluation metrics. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 47:853-899, 2013.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Emilio Jorge, Mikael Kageback, and Emil Gustavsson. Learning to play guess who? and inventing
a grounded language as a consequence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03218, 2016.
Armand Joulin, Laurens van der Maaten, Allan Jabri, and Nicolas Vasilache. Learning visual fea-
tures from large weakly supervised data. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2016 - 14th European
Conference, pp. 67-84, 2016.
Andrej Karpathy and Fei-Fei Li. Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
tions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3128-3137, 2015.
Douwe Kiela, Ivan Vulic, and Stephen Clark. Visual bilingual lexicon induction with transferred
convnet features. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pp. 148-158, 2015.
Douwe Kiela, Alexis Conneau, Allan Jabri, and Maximilian Nickel. Learning visually grounded
sentence representations. arXiv:1707.06320, 2017.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference for Learning Representations, 2014.
Ryan Kiros, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Richard S. Zemel. Unifying visual-semantic embeddings
with multimodal neural language models. arXiv:1411.2539, 2014.
Satwik Kottur, JoSe M. F. Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Natural language does not emerge
’naturally’ in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2952-2957, 2017.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and the
emergence of (natural) language. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N. Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? end-
to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing,pp. 2433-2443, 2017.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
Dollar, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
Vision - ECCV 2014 - 13th European Conference, pp. 740-755, 2014.
Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02275, 2017.
Lin Ma, Zhengdong Lu, Lifeng Shang, and Hang Li. Multimodal convolutional neural networks
for matching image and sentence. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
ICCV 2015, Santiago, Chile, December 7-13, 2015, pp. 2623-2631, 2015.
Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relax-
ation of discrete random variables. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10369, 2017.
Hideki Nakayama and Noriki Nishida. Zero-resource machine translation by multimodal encoder-
decoder network with multimedia pivot. Machine Translation, 31(1):49-64, 2017.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1310-
1318, 2013.
Janarthanan Rajendran, Mitesh M. Khapra, Sarath Chandar, and Balaraman Ravindran. Bridge
correlational neural networks for multilingual multimodal representation learning. In NAACL HLT
2016, The 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, San Diego California, USA, June 12-17, 2016, pp.
171-181, 2016.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 1715-1725, 2015.
Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, Anna Currey, Ulrich Germann, Barry Haddow, Kenneth Heafield,
Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Philip Williams. The university of edinburgh’s neural MT
systems for WMT17. In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation, pp.
389-399, 2017.
Richard Socher, Andrej Karpathy, Quoc V. Le, Christopher D. Manning, and Andrew Y. Ng.
Grounded compositional semantics for finding and describing images with sentences. TACL,
2:207-218, 2014.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning multiagent communication with
backpropagation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2244-2252, 2016.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27, pp. 3104-3112, 2014.
Ivan Vendrov, Ryan Kiros, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. Order-embeddings of images and
language. arXiv:1511.06361, 2015.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229-256, 1992.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin John-
son, Xiaobing Liu, Eukasz Kaiser, StePhan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto KaZaWa,
Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa,
Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s
neural machine translation system: Bridging the gaP between human and machine translation.
arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
Yuya Yoshikawa, Yutaro Shigeto, and Akikazu Takeuchi. STAIR caPtions: Constructing a large-
scale jaPanese image caPtion dataset. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tionfor Computational Linguistics, pp. 417-421, 2017.
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
A Choice of Listener Loss Function
We compare two alternatives for training the listener: (1) a pairwise ranking loss, as used in Havrylov
& Titov (2017) and Nakayama & Nishida (2017), and (2) the MSE loss, in addition to the one
(Eq. (1)) used in this paper.
Pairwise ranking loss Denoting the message vector, the target image and the k-th distractor image
as m ,i and ik, respectively, this cost function is expressed as:
K
J(isn,rank) = X max(0, α -Sim(EEN(m), EBG(i)) + Sim(EEN(m), EIMG(ik))),
k=1
where α is a margin hyperparameter and sim(∙) is a function that computes the similarity between
two vectors. The most common choice for sim(∙) in practice is cosine similarity (Nakayama &
Nishida, 2017). Note, however, that this only aligns the direction of the message and the target
image vectors, not the magnitude. To facilitate translation, the speaker module should take as input
a normalized image vector. We found this use of normalized image vectors to consistently hurt
performance in all our experiments.
MSE loss It has been found that minimizing the MSE loss can be effective in learning vi-
sually grounded representations of language (see, e.g., Chrupala et al., 2015). While our loss
function is very similar to minimizing the MSE loss, there is an important distinction. Letting
X = EEN(m) — EBMG(i), the MSE loss function is given by x2, with a derivative of 2x. Our loss
function is - log(1/x2), of which the derivative is 2/x. Note that the gradient is initially small,
when x is large, but grows larger in magnitude as the listener loss is minimized.
Figure 6: Comparison of our listener loss function with MSE loss.
In Figure 6, we show the learning curve of our model on Multi30k Task 2 EN-DE trained using
either our listener loss function or the MSE loss. At the initial stage of learning, the listener trained
using our loss function learns very slowly due to a small gradient. As the listener becomes better at
aligning target images and sentences, it begins to learn much more quickly. On the other hand, we
observe that the listener trained using the MSE loss immediately starts to learn, but learning slows
down quickly.
Our loss term - log(1/x2) is not defined at 0. In practice, x is almost never 0, and we further
add small noise to x both to avoid x = 0 and to regularize learning. Empirically, we observe our
formulation gives much better translation performance than both the pairwise ranking loss and the
MSE loss.
B	Word-Level Nearest Neighbor Analysis
Table 3 showcases three concepts in English and German, where for each concept, the most repre-
sentative image is shown, as well as the five nearest neighboring words (by cosine similarity).
We note that nearest neighbors for most words correspond to our semantic judgments: galaxy is
closest to universe in English and Galaxie to Universum in German. Similarly, plant or Pflanze
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
(a) Galaxy (b) Galaxie
(c) Plant (d) Pflanze
(e) Fox (f) Fuchs
Word	Neighbors
(a) Galaxy (b) Galaxie	Universe, Comet, Meteor, Exoplanet, Planet Universum, Exoplanet, Komet, Meteor, Planeten
(c) Plant (d) Pflanze	Leaf, Flower, Sunflower, Tree, Cucumber Blatt, Gurke, Blume, Baum, Garten
(e) Fox (f) Fuchs	Celebrity, Girl, Hair, Woman, Bell Kanguru, Lowe, Hirsch, Esel, Wolf
Table 3: Nearest neighbors of foreign word embeddings learned from communication, along with a sample
image for each concept in the dataset. The English word embeddings were learned by the German agent and
vice versa.
is closest to leaf or Blatt. For concepts that evoke different senses across languages, however,
we observe different nearest neighbors. For example, most images for Fox in the dataset contain a
person, whereas images for Fuchs contain an animal. This encourages the German agent to associate
Fox closely with Celebrity and Girl, whereas the English agent learns that Fuchs is a furry animal,
similar to Kanguru or Lowe.
C Sentence-Level Sample Translations
Src	ein hund springt auf einer wiese	vor	ein mann hθngt an einem SeiImitrOnen	ein skateboarder	an einer	boschung	ZU
einem WeiBen zaun in die luft.	das Uber ein wasser gespannt ist.	einem parkplatz .
Ref	a dog runs on the green grass	near	a	a man wearing bathing trunks is	para-	a skateboard is grinding	on	a	curb	with
wooden fence .	sailing in the water .	his skateboard .
NN	a	brunette photographer is kneeling	police watch some punk rock types at a	a man is	standing on the streets taking
down to take a photo .	protest .	photographs .
NMT	a	dog is jumping over a fence .	a man in a blue shirt is riding a bike .	a man in	a blue shirt is riding a bike .
N&N	a	brown dog is running on the grass.	a man in a wetsuit is surfing a large	a man in	a blue shirt is walking down
wave .	the sidewalk .
Model	two dogs playing with a ball in the grass	a man is parasailing in the ocean .	a man in	a blue shirt and black pants is
.	skateboarding .
Table 4: Sample DE-EN translations from Multi30k Task 2 test set. Images were not used to aid translation
and are only shown for references. We show the source sentence as Src and one of the five target sentences
as Ref. The outputs from the nearest neighbor baseline are shown as NN, NMT baseline with neighbor pairs
as NMT, the 3-way, both decoder model from (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017) as N&N, and our (pretrained, spk
fixed) model as Model.
In Table 4, we compare sample translations from our nearest neighbor and NMT baselines, as well
as the best model from (Nakayama & Nishida, 2017) and our best model. We observe that the
nearest neighbor baseline generates translations that are mostly unrelated to the reference sentence.
The NMT baseline, on the other hand, often generates the correct subject of the sentence, and seems
capable of capturing the main actor in the scene. The 3-way, both decoder model from (Nakayama
& Nishida, 2017) captures the main actors and the environment in the scene. Our model appears to
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
capture even the minor details, such as quantity (number of dogs) and specific activity (parasailing,
skateboarding).
D Sentence-level Qualitative Analysis
Figure 7: Sharing EI
Figure 8: Number of distractors.
We conjectured that grounding the native and foreign languages into a shared visual space allows
agents to understand foreign languages. To verify this, we trained our base model (not pretrained)
on COCO & STAIR, where agents have language-specific image encoders, e.g. the English agent
has two separate image encoders: one for the English speaking module and another for the Japanese
encoder. We compare this with our original model with the same architecture. We plot the commu-
nication accuracy and JA-EN validation BLEU scores in Figure 7. Red curves indicate validation
communication accuracy (left axis), and green curves indicate BLEU score (right axis). Solid lines
denote the standard model and dotted lines denote the model without sharing the image encoder.
We observe no significant difference in the communication performance: the model that does not
share the image encoder performs just as well in the communication task. However, translation
performance greatly suffers without access to the shared visual modality.
In Figure 8, we show the learning curve of four base models, with different number of distrac-
tors (K). We observe that a larger number of distractors helps the model learn faster initially, but
otherwise gives no performance benefit.
E Translation in Non-concrete Domains
As our agents understand foreign languages through grounding in the visual modality, we investigate
their ability to generalize to non-visual, abstract domains. We train our (pretrained, spk fixed) model
on Multi30k Task 2, and let it translate German sentences from WMT’15 DE-EN validation and test
set. See Table 5.
We note that our model is able to capture some visual elements in a sentence, such as snow or
mountain, but generally produces poor quality translations. We observe that most words in the
source sentence from WMT’15 do not occur in Multi30k’s training set, hence our model mostly
receives <UNK> vectors.
F	Zero-resource Translation
To showcase our models’ ability to learn to translate without parallel corpora, we train our base
model on a communication task between a low-resource language pair: German and Japanese. We
take the German corpus from Multi30k Task2, the Japanese corpus from STAIR, and train two
models on a sentence-level communication task between the two languages. In Tables 6 and 7, we
show the Japanese source sentence (src), the model output in German (hyp), and their translation to
English using Google Translate. We observe that our model mostly generates reasonable sentences,
and captures properties such as color and action in the scene.
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Src Schnee liegt insbeSondere auf den StraBen im RieSengebirge Und im Gebirge Orlicke hory.
Ref Snow is particularly affecting the roads in the Krkonose and Orlicke mountains.
HyP a man is standing on a snow covered mountain .
Src
Ref
Hyp
Src
Ref
Hyp
Src
Ref
Hyp
Das Tote Meer ist sogar noch warmer und dort wird das ganze Jahr Uber gebadet.
The Dead Sea is even warmer, and people swim in it all year round.
a man is surfing in the ocean .
Es folgten die ersten Radfahrer und LaUfer um 10 Uhr.
Then it was the turn of the cyclists and runners, who began at 10 am.
a man in a red and white uniform is riding a dirt bike in front of a crowd .
Das Baby, das so ergreifend von einem Spezialeinsatzkommando in Sicherheit getragen wurde
The baby who was carried poignantly to safety by a special forces commando
a baby in a yellow shirt is sleeping .
Table 5: Sample translations from WMT’15 DE-EN validation and test set.
Src	7∣J ^^一 ⅞ ^V7÷ L上 5 占 ^Z⅞犬	赤占白G野球G二二7才一八 ⅛着太少年力、' 7卜⅛情之P V^⅞	黄色u ypʌ^檄讲雕屋ts 瞬^
Hyp	ein hund fangt einen frisbee .	ein baseballspieler mit rotem helm und weiβem trikot holt mit dem schlager aus , um den heranfliegenden ball ZU treffen .	ein flugzeug fliegt Uber eine flugzeug- piste .
Src (en)	Dog keeps trying to catch Frisbee	A boy in a red and white baseball uni- form wears a bat	The moment when a yellow propeller plane takes off
Hyp (en)	a dog catches a frisbee.	a baseball player with a red helmet and a white tricot takes the bat out to hit the ball.	An airplane flies over an airplane run- way.
Table 6: Sample JA-DE translations
Src	黄色㈠亍二入术一儿在打^返寸 女性	黄色C々、G 7口＞卜部分仁 取4付I十bH^夕A^一仁 黄色口）:人环映n P □马		木 G 枝 ^ 止⅛oPU⅞ 目 G 周 ^^足讲赤㈠舄
HyP	eine tennisspielerin in weiβ und grunem oberteil spielt tennis	ein gelber bus steht geparkt vor einem nicht fertigen gebaude .	ein vogel sitzt auf einem ast .
Src (en)	A woman striking a yellow tennis ball	A yellow bus is reflected on the rearview mirror attached to the front part of the yellow bus.	Around the eyes stopping at the branches of the tree and a red bird
HyP (en)-	a tennis player in white and green shell playing tennis	A yellow bus is parked in front of a non-finished building.	A bird sitting on a branch.
Table 7: Sample JA-DE translations
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
G	Alien Language Translation
To demonstrate our models’ ability to learn to translate only with monolingual captions, we ex-
periment with a language for which no parallel corpus exists, nor the knowledge of the language
itself: Klingon. As no image captions are available in Klingon, we translate 15k English captions
in Multi30k Task 1 into Klingon pIqaD6 using Bing Translator.7 We tokenize the Klingon captions
and discard words occurring less than 5 times in the training data. We then train our base model
(no pretraining) on English and Klingon communication. In Tables 9 and 10, the source sentence in
English is shown as src, the Klingon model output in hyp, and the English translation of the output
in hyp (en) (using Bing Translator). Although the Klingon training data is noisy and imperfect, we
observe that our model learns to translate only With 15k KIingon captions. This example illustrates
how we can learn to translate even if there is no knowledge of the other language, and where a
professional translator would take a long time to first acquire the other language.
Src
HyP
HyP (en)
a black and white dog swimming in clear water . a woman sitting on a very large rock smiling at
the camera with trees in the background .
皿 MbQy g hfλ y<? Wr <« Cb r 八，¥ P s。<unk>
，—
a young girl is swimming in a pool .
T「'q^q s「q bκιif v^H
XAqz仃 <unk>，kv
only a young girl pink and suit bathing
the Black Dog ran, and go through the edge of the
flood water.
We have caught her man some 200 top standing
stone
Figure 9: Sample English-Klingon translations
a man sings and plays the guitar into a
microphone .
<^b κ<q q-τb<κ 勺i ?ft τ^^
qQ4κκκr qz
It was, he was a man and Song michrophone.
Src
HyP
HyP (en)
a brown dog picks up a <UNK> g from a stone surface .	a woman in a mostly black outfit and white helmet riding a bike with blurred trees in the background .
皿 WbQy be 仃 Err HFΛ R<。<UNK>	1« b^ b/ KK Cb ι<“<qτ" SD b Ti y»内N qQττrq τr τ^<b
Brown the meat in you must go through grass	bicycle ride on him, saying, this man shirt Red and purple, and bald.
Figure 10: Sample English-Klingon translations
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klingon_alphabets
7https://www.bing.com/translator
18