Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
i-REVNET: DEEP INVERTIBLE NETWORKS
Jorn-Henrik Jacobsen 吒 Arnold Smeulders ^, Edouard Oyallon §
^University of Amsterdam
joern.jacobsen@bethgelab.org
Ab stract
It is widely believed that the success of deep convolutional networks is based on
progressively discarding uninformative variability about the input with respect to
the problem at hand. This is supported empirically by the difficulty of recovering
images from their hidden representations, in most commonly used network archi-
tectures. In this paper we show via a one-to-one mapping that this loss of infor-
mation is not a necessary condition to learn representations that generalize well
on complicated problems, such as ImageNet. Via a cascade of homeomorphic
layers, we build the i-RevNet, a network that can be fully inverted up to the final
projection onto the classes, i.e. no information is discarded. Building an invertible
architecture is difficult, for one, because the local inversion is ill-conditioned, we
overcome this by providing an explicit inverse. An analysis of i-RevNets learned
representations suggests an alternative explanation for the success of deep net-
works by a progressive contraction and linear separation with depth. To shed light
on the nature of the model learned by the i-RevNet we reconstruct linear interpo-
lations between natural image representations.
1	Introduction
A CNN may be very effective in classifying images of all sorts (He et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), but the cascade of linear and nonlinear operators reveals little about the contribution of the
internal representation to the classification. The learning process is characterized by a steady re-
duction of large amounts of uninformative variability in the images while simultaneously revealing
the essence of the visual class. It is widely believed that this process is based on progressively dis-
carding uninformative variability about the input with respect to the problem at hand (Dosovitskiy
& Brox, 2016; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2016; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Achille & Soatto, 2017).
However, the extent to which information is discarded is lost somewhere in the intermediate non-
linear processing steps. In this paper, we aim to provide insight into the variability reduction process
by proposing an invertible convolutional network, that does not discard any information about the
input.
The difficulty to recover images from their hidden representations is found in many commonly used
network architectures (Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2016). This poses the
question if a substantial loss of information is necessary for successful classification. We show
information does not have to be discarded. By using homeomorphic layers, the invariance can be
built only at the very last layer via a projection.
In Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby (2017), minimal sufficient statistics are proposed as a candidate to explain
the reduction of variability. Tishby & Zaslavsky (2015) introduces the information bottleneck princi-
ple which states that an optimal representation must reduce the mutual information between an input
and its representation to reduce as much uninformative variability as possible. At the same time, the
network should maximize the mutual information between the desired output and its representation
to effectively preserve each class from collapsing onto other classes. The effect of the information
bottleneck was demonstrated on small datasets in Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby (2017); Achille & Soatto
(2017).
Row at Bethgelab, University of Tubingen
§CVN, CentraleSuPelec, Universite Paris-Saclay ; Galen team, INRIA Saclay
SequeL team, INRIA Lille ; DL ENS, Universite PSL
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
However, in this work, we show it is not a necessary condition and we build a cascade of home-
omorphic layers, which preserves the mutual information between input and hidden representation
and shows that the loss of information can only occur at the final layer. This way we demonstrate
that a loss of information can be avoided while maintaining discriminability, even for large-scale
problems like ImageNet. One way to reduce variability is progressive contraction with respect to a
meaningful `2 metric in the intermediate representations.
Several works (Oyallon, 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) observed a phenomenon of progressive sep-
aration and contraction in non-invertible networks on limited datasets. Those progressive improve-
ments can be interpreted as the creation of progressively stronger invariants for classification. Ide-
ally, the contraction should not be too brutal to avoid removing important information from the
intermediate signal. This shows that a good trade-off between discriminability and invariance has
to be progressively built. In this paper, we extend some findings of Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Oy-
allon (2017) to ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and, most importantly, show that a loss of
information is not necessary for observing a progressive contraction.
The duality between invariance and separation of the classes is discussed in Mallat (2016). Here,
intra-class variabilities are modeled as Lie groups that are processed by performing a parallel trans-
port along those symmetries. Filters are adapted through learning to the specific bias of the dataset
and avoid to contract along discriminative directions. However, using groups beyond the Euclidean
case for image classification is hard. Mainly because groups associated with abstract variabilities
are difficult to estimate due to their high-dimensional nature, as well as the appropriate degree of
invariance required. An illustration of this framework on the Euclidean group is given by the scatter-
ing transform (Mallat, 2012), which builds invariance to small translations while being recoverable
to a certain extent. In this work, we introduce a network that cannot discard any information ex-
cept at the final classification stage, while we demonstrate numerically progressive contraction and
separation of the signal classes.
We introduce the i-RevNet, an invertible deep network.1 i-RevNets retain all information about the
input signal in any of their intermediate representations up until the last layer. Our architecture builds
upon the recently introduced RevNet (Gomez et al., 2017), where we replace the non-invertible
components of the original RevNets by invertible ones. i-RevNets achieve the same performance on
Imagenet compared to similar non-invertible RevNet and ResNet architectures (Gomez et al., 2017;
He et al., 2016).
To shed light on the mechanism underlying the generalization-ability of the learned representation,
we show that i-RevNets progressively separate and contract signals with depth. Our results are
evidence for an effective reduction of variability through a contraction with a recoverable input
obtained from a series of one-to-one mappings.
2	Related Work
Several recent works show that significant information about the input images is lost with depth in
successful Imagenet classification CNNs (Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2016).
To understand the loss of information, the references propose to invert the representations by means
of learned or hand-engineered priors. The approximate inversions indicate increased geometric
and photometric invariance with depth. Multiple other works report progressive properties of deep
networks that may be linked to discarded information in the representations as well, such as lin-
earization (Radford et al., 2015), linear separability (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), contraction (Oyallon,
2017) and low-dimensional embeddings (Aubry & Russell, 2015). However, it is not clear from
above observations if the loss of information is a necessity for the observed progressive phenomena.
In this work, we show that progressive separation and contraction can be obtained while at the same
time allowing an exact reconstruction of the signal.
Multiple frameworks have been introduced that permit to learn invertible representations under cer-
tain conditions. Parseval networks (Cisse et al., 2017) have been introduced to increase the robust-
ness of learned representations with respect to adversarial attacks. In this framework, the spectrum
of convolutional operators is constrained to norm 1 during learning. The linear operator is thus
injective.
1Code is available at: https://github.com/jhjacobsen/pytorch-i-revnet
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
As a consequence, the input of Parseval networks can be recovered if but only if the built-in non-
linearities are invertible as well, which is typically not the case. Bruna et al. (2013) derive condi-
tions under which pooling representations are, but our method directly overcomes this issue. The
Scattering transform (Mallat, 2012) is an example of predefined deep representation, approximately
invariant to translations, that can be reconstructed when the degree of invariance specified is small.
Yet, it requires a gradient descent optimization and no guarantee of convergences are known. In
summary, the references make clear that invertibility requires special care in designing the architec-
ture or special care in designing the optimization procedure. In this paper, we introduce a network,
that overcomes these issues and has an exact inverse by construction.
Our main inspiration for this work is the recent reversible residual network (RevNet), introduced
in Gomez et al. (2017). RevNets are in turn closely related to NICE and Real-NVP architec-
tures (Dinh et al., 2016; 2014), which make use of constrained Jacobian determinants for generative
modeling. All these architectures are similar to the lifting scheme (Sweldens, 1998) and Feistel
cipher diagrams (Menezes et al., 1996), as we will show. RevNets illustrate how to build invert-
ible ResNet-type blocks that avoid storing intermediate activations necessary for the backward pass.
However, RevNets still employ multiple non-invertible operators like max-pooling and downsam-
pling operators as part of the network. As such, RevNets are not invertible by construction. In this
paper, we show how to build an invertible type of RevNet architecture that performs competitively
with RevNets on Imagenet, which we call i-RevNet for invertible RevNet.
3	THE i-REVNET
This section introduces the general framework of the i-RevNet architecture and explains how to
explicitly build an inverse or a left-inverse to an i-RevNet. Its practical implementation is discussed,
and we demonstrate competitive numerical results.
3.1	An invertible architecture
Figure 1: The main component of the i-RevNet and its inverse. RevNet blocks are interleaved with
convolutional bottlenecks Fj and reshuffling operations Sj to ensure invertibility of the architecture
∙-v
and computational efficiency. The input is processed through a splitting operator S, and output is
∙-v
merged through M. Observe that the inverse network is obtained with minimal adaptations.
We describe i-RevNets in their general setting. Their foundations are largely grounded in the recent
RevNet architecture (Gomez et al., 2017). In an i-RevNet, an initial input is split into two sublayers
'—" ʌ
(x0, Xo) of equal size, thanks to a splitting operator SX，(χ0,X0), in this paper We choose to split
∙-v
the channel dimension as is done in RevNets. The operator S is linear, injective, reduces the spatial
resolution of the coefficients and can potentially increase the layer size, as Wider layers usually
improve the classification performance (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). We can thus build a
pseudo inverse S+ that Will be used for the inversion. Recall that if S is invertible, then S+ = S-1.
The number of coefficients of the next block is maintained, and at each depth j , the representation
Φjx is again decoupled into two variables ΦjX，(xj, Xj) that play interlaced roles.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
The strategy implemented by an i-RevNet consists in an alternation between additions, and non-
linear operators Fj , while progressively down-sampling the signal thanks to the operators Sj . Here,
Fj consists of convolutions and non-linearity on Xj. The pair of the final layer is concatenated
∕~∙j	∕~∙j	∕~∙j	“	∕~∙j	∕~∙j
through a merging operator M. We will omit M, M-1, S+ and S for the sake of simplicity, when
not necessary. Figure 1 describes the blocks of an i-RevNet. The design is similar to the Feistel
cipher diagrams (Menezes et al., 1996) or a lifting scheme (Sweldens, 1998), which are invertible
and efficient implementations of complex transforms like second generation wavelets.
In this way, we avoid the non-invertible modules of a RevNet (e.g. max-pooling or strides) which
are necessary to train them in a reasonable time and are designed to build invariance w.r.t. translation
variability. Our method shows we can replace them by linear and invertible modules Sj , that can
reduce the spatial resolution (we refer to it as a spatial down-sampling for the sake of simplicity)
while maintaining the layer’s size by increasing the number of channels.
We keep the computational cost manageable by tightly coupling downsampling and increase in
width of the network. Reducing the spatial resolution can be undesirable, so Sj can potentially be
the identity. We refer to such networks as i-RevNets. This leads to the following equations:
xj+1 = sj+1xj	< ⇒ (Xj = Sj + 1xj + 1
xj+1 = Xj + Fj + 1xj	IXj = xj+1 ― Fj+1xj
(1)
Our downsampling layer can be written for u the spatial variable
and λ the channel index:
“I
Figure 2: Illustration of the
invertible down-sampling
Sj X(u, λ) = X(Ψ(u, λ))
where Ψ is some invertible mapping. In principle, any invert-
ible downsampling operation like e.g. dilated convolutions (Yu &
Koltun, 2015) can be considered here. We use the inverse of the
operation described in Shi et al. (2016) as illustrated in Figure 2,
since it preserves roughly the spatial ordering, and thus permits to
avoid mixing different neighborhoods via the next convolution. S
is similar, but also linearly increases the channel dimensionality, for
example by concatenating 0.
The final layer Φx，ΦjX = (XJ,Xj) is then averaged along the spatial dimension, followed
by a ReLU non-linearity and finally a linear projection on the class probes, which are fed to a
supervised training algorithm. From a given i-RevNet, it is possible to define a left-inverse Φ+, i.e.
Φ+ Φx = X or even an inverse Φ-1, i.e. Φ-1Φx = Φ-1Φx = X if S is invertible. In these cases,
the convolutional sections are as well some i-RevNets. An i-RevNet is the dual of its inverse, in the
sense that it requires to replace (Sj, Fj) by (S-1, -Fj) at each depth j, and to apply S+ on the
output. In consequence, its implementation is simple and specified by Equation (1). In Subsection
4.2, we discuss that the inverse of Φ does not suffer from significant round-off errors, while however
being very sensitive to small variations ofan input on a large subspace, as shown in Subsection 4.1.
3.2	Architecture, training and performances
In this subsection, we describe two models that we trained: an injective i-RevNet (a) and a bijective
i-RevNet (b), with fewer parameters. The hyper-parameters were selected to be either close to the
ResNet and RevNet baselines in terms of the number of layers (a) or parameters (b) while keeping
performance competitive. For the same reasons as in Gomez et al. (2017), our scheme also allows
avoiding storing any intermediate activations at training time, making memory consumption for very
deep i-RevNets not an issue in practice. We compare our implementation with a RevNet with 56
layers corresponding to 28M parameters, as provided in the open source release of Gomez et al.
(2017), and with a standard ResNet of 50 layers, with 26M parameters (He et al., 2016).
Each block Fj is a bottleneck block, which consists of a succession of 3 convolutional operators,
each preceded by Batchnormalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and ReLU non-linearity. The second
layer has four times fewer channels than the other two, while their corresponding kernel sizes are
respectively 1 × 1, 3 × 3, 1 × 1.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Architecture Injective Bijective Top-1 error Parameters
ResNet	-	-			24.7	26M
RevNet	-	-	25.2	28M
i-RevNet (a)	yes	-	24.7	181M
i-RevNet (b)	yes	yes	26.7	29M
Table 1: Comparison of different architectures trained on ILSVRC-2012, in terms of classification
accuracy and number of parameters
The final representation is spatially averaged and projected onto the 1000 classes after a ReLU non-
linearity. We now discuss how we progressively decrease the spatial resolution, while increasing the
number of channels per layer by use of the operators Sj .
We first describe the model (a), that consists of 56 layers which have been optimized to match
the performances of a RevNet or a ResNet with approximatively the same number of layers. In
particular, we explain how we progressively decrease the spatial resolution, while increasing the
number of channels per block by use of the operators Sj .
∣⅛≠
The splitting operator S consists in a linear and injective embedding that downsamples by a factor
42 the spatial resolution by increasing the number of output channels from 48 to 96 by simply adding
0. The latter permits to increase the initial layer size, and consequently, the size of the next layers as
performed in Gomez et al. (2017); it is thus not a bijective yet an injective i-RevNet. At depth j , Sj
allows us to reduce the number of computations while maintaining good classification performance.
It will correspond to a downsampling operator respectively at the depth 3j = 15, 27, 45 (3j as one
block corresponds to three layers), similar to a normal RevNet. The spatial resolution of these layers
is reduced by a factor 22 while increasing the number of channels by a factor of 4 respectively to 48,
192, 768 and 3072. Furthermore, it means that the corresponding spatial resolutions for an input of
size 2242 are respectively 1122, 562, 282, 142, 72. The total number of coefficients at each layer is
then about 0.3M . All the remaining blocks Sj are kept fix to the identity as explained in the section
above.
Architecture (b) is bijective, it consists of 300 layers (100 blocks), whose total numbers of parame-
ters have been optimized to match those of a RevNet with 56 layers. Initially, the input is split via S,
which corresponds to an invertible spatial downsampling of 22 that increases the number of chan-
nels from 3 to 12. It thus keeps the dimension constant and permits building a bijective i-RevNet.
Then, at depth 3j = 3, 21, 69, 285, the spatial resolution is reduced by 22 via Sj. Contrary to the
architecture (a), the dimensionality of each layer is constantly equal to 3 × 2242, until the final layer,
with channel sizes of 24, 96, 384, 1536.
For both networks, the training on Imagenet
follows the same setup as Gomez et al. (2017).
We train with SGD and momentum of 0.9. We
regularized the model with a `2 weight decay of
10-4 and batch normalization. The dataset is
processed for 600k iterations on a batch size of
256, distributed on 4GPUs. The initial learning
rate is 0.1, dropped by a factor of ten every 160k
iterations. The dataset was augmented accord-
ing to Gomez et al. (2017). The images values
are mapped to [0, 1] while following geometric
transformations were applied: random scaling,
random horizontal flipping, random cropping
of size 2242 , and finally color distortions. No
other regularizations were incorporated into the
classification pipeline. At test time, we rescale
the image size to 2562 and perform a center
crop of size 2242.
0O
6 4 2
SSoI AdOi3u9 SSalo
2	4	6
Iterations	×1Q5
Figure 3: Training loss of the i-RevNet (b), com-
pared to the ResNet, on ImageNet.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
We report the training loss (i.e. Cross entropy) curves in Figure 3 of our i-RevNet (b) and the ResNet
baseline, displayed is a moving average over 100 iterations. Observe that the decrease of both
training-losses are very similar which indicates that the constraint of invertibility does not interfere
negatively with the learning process. However, we observed one third longer wall-clock times for
i-RevNets compared to plain RevNets because the channel size becomes larger. The Table 1 reports
the performances of our i-RevNets, with comparable RevNet and ResNet. First, we compare the
i-RevNet (a) with the RevNet and ResNet. Indeed, those CNNs have the same number of layers,
and the i-RevNet (a) increases the channel width of the initial layer as done in Gomez et al. (2017).
The drawback of this technique is that the kernel sizes will be larger for all subsequent layers.
The i-RevNet (a) has about 6 times more parameters than a RevNet and a ResNet but leads to a
similar accuracy on the validation set of ImageNet. On the contrary, the i-RevNet (b) is designed to
have roughly the same number of parameters as the RevNet and ResNet, while being bijective. Its
accuracy decreases by 1.5% absolute percent on ImageNet compared to the RevNet baseline, which
is not surprising because the number of channels was not drastically increased in the earlier layers
as done in the baselines (Gomez et al., 2017; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016); we did not
explore wide ranges of hyper-parameters, thus the gap between (a) and (b) can likely be reduced
with additional engineering.
4	Analysis of the inverse
We now analyze the representation Φ built by our bijective neural network i-RevNet (b) and its
inverse Φ-1, as trained on ILSVRC-2012. We first explain why obtaining Φ-1 is challenging, even
locally. We then discuss the reconstruction, while displaying in the image space linear interpolations
between representations.
4.1	An ill-conditioned inversion
In the previous section, we have described the
i-RevNet architecture, that permits defining a
deep network with an explicit inverse. We ex-
plain now why this is normally difficult, by
studying its local inversion. We study the lo-
cal stability of a network Φ and its inverse Φ-1
w.r.t. to its input, which means that we will
quantify locally the variations of the network
and its inverse w.r.t. to small variations of an
input. As Φ is differentiable (and its inverse as
well), an equivalent way to perform this study
is to analyze the singular values of the differ-
ential ∂Φ at some point, as for (a, b) close the
following holds:
Φa ≈ Φb + ∂Φb (a - b).
Rank of the singular value
Figure 4: Normalized sorted singular values of
∂Φx.
Ideally, a well-conditioned operator has all its singular values constant equal to 1, for instance as
achieved by the isometric operators of Cisse et al. (2017).
In our numerical application to an image x, ∂Φx corresponds to a very large matrix (square of the
number of coefficients of the image at least) whose computations are expensive. Figure 4 corre-
SPonds to the singular values of the differential (i.e. the square roots of the eigen values of ∂Φ*∂Φ),
in decreasing order, for a given natural image from ImageNet. The example we plot is typical of
the behavior of ∂Φ. Observe there is a fast decay: numerically, the first 103 and 104 singular values
are resPonsible resPectively for 80% and 97% of the cumulated energy (i.e. sum of squared singular
values). This indicates Φ linearizes the sPace locally in a considerably smaller sPace in comParison
to the original inPut dimension. However, the dimensionality is still quite large (i.e. > 10) and thus
we can not infer that Φ lays locally in a low-dimensional manifold. It also Proves that inversing Φ
is difficult and is an ill-conditioned Problem. Thus obtaining imPlicitly this inverse would be a chal-
lenging task that we avoided, thanks to the formal reconstruction algorithm Provided by Subsection
3.1.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 5: This graphic displays several reconstructed sequences {xt}t. The left image corresponds
to x0 and the right image to x1.
4.2	Linear interpolation and reconstruction
Visualizing or understanding the important directions in the representation of inner layers of a CNN,
and in particular, the final layer is complex because typically the cascade is either not invertible or
unstable. One approach to reconstruct from an output layer consists in finding the input image that
matches the activation through via gradient descent. However, this technique leads only to a partial
or informal reconstruction (Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2015).
Another method consists in embedding the representation in a lower dimensional space and com-
paring the common attributes of nearest neighbors (Szegedy et al., 2013). It is also possible to train
a CNN to reconstruct the representation (Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016). Yet these methods require a
priori knowledge in order to find the appropriate embeddings or training sets. We now discuss the
improvements achieved by the i-RevNet.
Our main claim is that while the local inversion is ill-conditioned, the inverse Φ-1 computations
do not involve significant round-off errors. The forward pass of the network does not seem to
suffer from significant instabilities, thus it seems coherent to assume that this will hold for Φ-1 as
well. For example, adding constraints beyond vanishing moments in the case of a Lifting scheme
is difficult (Sweldens, 1998; Mallat, 1999), and this is a weakness of this method. We validate our
claim by computing the empirical relative error on several subsets X of data:
e(X) = ∣⅛ X
x∈X
kx - Φ-1Φxk
kxk
We evaluate this measure on a subset X1 of |X1| = 104 independent uniform noises and on the
validation set X2 of ImageNet. We report (X1) = 5 × 10-6 and (X2) = 3 × 10-6 respectively,
which are close to the machine error and indicates that the inversion does not suffer from significant
round-off errors.
Given a pair of images {x0, x1}, we propose to study linear interpolations between the pair of
representations {Φx0, Φx1}, in the feature domain. Those interpolations correspond to existing
images as Φ-1 is an exact inverse. We reconstruct a convex path between two input points; it means
that if:
φt = tΦx0 + (1 - t)Φx1,
then: xt = Φ-1φt is a signal that corresponds to an image.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
20
AOEJnOQE %
O O
6 4
E,m8E %
10	20	30	40	50	100	200	300
ɜj	ɜj
(a) ResNet	(b) i-RevNet
Figure 6: Accuracy at depth j for a linear SVM and a 1-nearest neighbor classifier applied to the
spatially averaged Φj .
We discretized [0, 1] into {t1, ..., tk}, adapt the step size manually and reconstruct the sequence
of {xt1 , ..., xtk}. Results are displayed in the Figure 5. We selected images from the basel face
dataset (Paysan et al., 2009), describable texture dataset (Cimpoi et al., 2014) and imagenet.
We now interpret the results. First, observe that a linear interpolation in the feature space is not
a linear interpolation in the image space and that intermediary images are noisy, even for small
deformations, yet they mostly remain recognizable. However, some geometric transformations such
as a 3D-rotation seem to have been linearized, as suggested in Aubry & Russell (2015). In the next
section, we thus investigate how the linear separation progresses with depth.
5	A contraction
In this section, we study again the bijective i-RevNet. We first show that a localized or linear
classifier progressively improves with depth. Then, we describe the linear subspace spanned by
Φ, namely the feature space, showing that the classification can be performed on a much smaller
subspace, which can be built via a PCA.
5.1	Progressive linear separation and contraction
We show that both a ResNet and an i-RevNet build a progressively more linearly separable and
contracted representation as measured in Oyallon (2017). Observe this property holds for the i-
RevNet despite the fact that it can not discard any information.
We investigate these properties in each block, with the following experimental protocol. To reduce
the computational burden we used a subset of 100 randomly selected imagenet classes, that consist
of N = 120k images, and keep the same subset during all our following experiments. At each depth
j, we extract the features {Φjxn}n≤N of the training set, we average them along the spatial variable
and standardize them in order to avoid any ill-conditioning effects. We used both a nearest neighbor
classifier and a linear SVM. The former is a localized classifier that indicates that the `2 metric is
progressively more important for classification, while a linear SVM measures the linear separation
of the different classes. The parameters of the linear SVM are cross-validated on a small subset of
the training set, prior to training on the 100 classes. We evaluate both classifiers for each model on
the validation set of ImageNet and report the Top-1 accuracy in Figure 6.
We observe that both classifiers progressively improve similarly with depth for each model, the lin-
ear SVM performing slightly better than the nearest neighbor classifier because it is the more robust
and discriminative classifier of the two. In the case of the i-RevNet, the classification performed by
the CNN leads to 77%, and the linear SVM performs slightly better because we did not fine-tune
the model to 100 classes. Observe that there is a more intense jump of performance on the 3 last
layers, which seems to indicate that the former layers have prepared the representation to be more
contracted and linearly separated for the final layers.
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
The results suggest a low-dimensional embedding of the data, but this is difficult to validate as
estimating local dimensionality in high dimensions is an open problem. However, in the next section,
we try to compute the dimension of the discriminative part of the representation built by an i-RevNet.
5.2	Dimensionality analysis of the feature space
In this section, we investigate if we can refine the dimensionality of informative variabilities in the
final layer of an i-RevNet. Indeed, the cascade of convolutional operators has been trained on the
training set to separate the 1000 different classes while being a homeomorphism on its feature space.
Thus, the dimensionality of the feature space is potentially large.
As shown in the previous subsection, the final layer is progressively prepared to be projected on
the final probes corresponding to the classes. This indicates that the non-informative variabilities
for classification can be removed via a linear projection on the final layer Φ, which lie in a space
of dimension 1000, at most. However, this projection has been built via supervision, which can
still retain directions that have been contracted and thus will not be selected by an algorithm such as
PCA. We show in fact a PCA retains the necessary information for classification in a small subspace.
To do so, we build the linear projectors πd on
the subspace of the d first principal compo-
nents, and we propose to measure the classifica-
tion power of the projected representation with
a supervised classifier, e.g. nearest neighbor or
a linear SVM, on the previous 100 class task.
Again, the feature representation {Φxn }n≤N
are spatially averaged to remove the translation
variability, and standardized on the training set.
We apply both classifiers, and we report the
classification accuracy of {πdΦxn}n≤N w.r.t.
to d on the Figure 7. A linear projection re-
Figure 7: Accuracy of a linear SVM and nearest
neighbor against the number of principal compo-
moves some information that can not be recov-
ered by a linear classifier, therefore we observe
that the classification accuracy only decreases
significantly for d ≤ 200. This shows that the
signal indeed lies in a subspace much lower di- nents retained.
mensional than the original feature dimensions
that can be extracted simply with a PCA that only considers directions of largest variances, illustrat-
ing a successful contraction of the representation.
6	Conclusion
Invertible representations and their relationship to loss of information are on the agenda of deep
learning for some time. Understanding how transformations in feature space are related to the cor-
responding input is an important step towards interpretable deep networks, invertible deep networks
may play an important role in such analysis since, for example, one could potentially back-track a
property from the feature space to the input space. To the best of our knowledge, this work pro-
vides the first empirical evidence that learning invertible representations that do not discard any
information about their input on large-scale supervised problems is possible.
To achieve this we introduce the i-RevNet class of CNN which is fully invertible and permits to
exactly recover the input from its last convolutional layer. i-RevNets achieve the same classification
accuracy in the classification of complex datasets as illustrated on ILSVRC-2012, when compared
to the RevNet (Gomez et al., 2017) and ResNet (He et al., 2016) architectures with a similar number
of layers. Furthermore, the inverse network is obtained for free when training an i-RevNet, requiring
only minimal adaption to recover inputs from the hidden representations.
The absence of loss of information is surprising, given the wide believe, that discarding information
is essential for learning representations that generalize well to unseen data. We show that this is not
the case and propose to explain the generalization property with empirical evidence of progressive
separation and contraction with depth, on ImageNet.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Acknowledgements
Jom-Henrik Jacobsen was partially funded by the STW perspective program ImaGene. EdoUard
Oyallon was partially funded by the ERC grant InvariantClass 320959, via a grant for PhD Students
of the Conseil re´gional dIle-de-France (RDM-IdF), and a postdoctoral grant from the from DPEI
of Inria (AAR 2017POD057) for the collaboration with CWI. We thank Berkay Kicanaoglu for the
Basel Face data, Mathieu Andreux, Eugene Belilovsky, Amal Rannen, Patrick Putzky and Kyriacos
Shiarlis for feedback on drafts of the paper.
References
Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. On the emergence of invariance and disentangling in deep
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01350, 2017.
Mathieu Aubry and Bryan C Russell. Understanding deep features with computer-generated im-
agery. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2875-2883,
2015.
Joan Bruna, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Signal recovery from pooling representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1311.4025, 2013.
Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. De-
scribing textures in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 3606-3613, 2014.
Moustapha Cisse, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Yann Dauphin, and Nicolas Usunier. Parseval
networks: Improving robustness to adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 854-863, 2017.
Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. Nice: Non-linear independent components esti-
mation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox. Inverting visual representations with convolutional networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4829-
4837, 2016.
Aidan N Gomez, Mengye Ren, Raquel Urtasun, and Roger B Grosse. The reversible residual net-
work: Backpropagation without storing activations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.04585, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
770-778, 2016.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 448-456,
2015.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1097-1105,
2012.
Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep image representations by inverting
them. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
5188-5196, 2015.
Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Visualizing deep convolutional neural networks using
natural pre-images. International Journal of Computer Vision, 120(3):233-255, 2016.
Stephane Mallat. A wavelet tour Ofsignalprocessing. Academic press, 1999.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
StePhane Mallat. Group invariant scattering. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics,
65(10):1331-1398,2012.
Stephane Mallat. Understanding deep convolutional networks. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 374(2065):
20150203, 2016.
Alfred J Menezes, Paul C Van Oorschot, and Scott A Vanstone. Handbook of applied cryptography.
CRC press, 1996.
Edouard Oyallon. Building a regular decision boundary with deep networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01775, 2017.
Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter. A 3d face
model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition. In Advanced Video and Signal Based
Surveillance, 2009. AVSS’09. Sixth IEEE International Conference on, pp. 296-301. Ieee, 2009.
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211-252, 2015.
Wenzhe Shi, Jose Caballero, Ferenc Huszar, Johannes Totz, Andrew P Aitken, Rob Bishop, Daniel
Rueckert, and Zehan Wang. Real-time single image and video super-resolution using an efficient
sub-pixel convolutional neural network. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1874-1883, 2016.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via informa-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00810, 2017.
Wim Sweldens. The lifting scheme: A construction of second generation wavelets. SIAM journal
on mathematical analysis, 29(2):511-546, 1998.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle. In
Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2015 IEEE, pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2015.
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.07122, 2015.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07146, 2016.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
European conference on computer vision, pp. 818-833. Springer, 2014.
11