Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Combining Symbolic Expressions and Black-
box Function Evaluations in Neural Programs
Forough Arabshahi
University of California
Irvine, CA
farabsha@uci.edu
Sameer Singh
University of California
Irvine, CA
sameer@uci.edu
Animashree Anandkumar
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA
anima@caltech.edu
Ab stract
Neural programming involves training neural networks to learn programs, math-
ematics, or logic from data. Previous works have failed to achieve good general-
ization performance, especially on problems and programs with high complexity
or on large domains. This is because they mostly rely either on black-box func-
tion evaluations that do not capture the structure of the program, or on detailed
execution traces that are expensive to obtain, and hence the training data has poor
coverage of the domain under consideration. We present a novel framework that
utilizes black-box function evaluations, in conjunction with symbolic expressions
that define relationships between the given functions. We employ tree LSTMs to
incorporate the structure of the symbolic expression trees. We use tree encoding for
numbers present in function evaluation data, based on their decimal representation.
We present an evaluation benchmark for this task to demonstrate our proposed
model combines symbolic reasoning and function evaluation in a fruitful manner,
obtaining high accuracies in our experiments. Our framework generalizes signifi-
cantly better to expressions of higher depth and is able to fill partial equations with
valid completions.
1	Introduction
Human beings possess impressive abilities for abstract mathematical and logical thinking. It has
long been the dream of computer scientists to design machines with such capabilities: machines that
can automatically learn and reason, thereby removing the need to manually program them. Neural
programming, where neural networks are used to learn programs, mathematics, or logic, has recently
shown promise towards this goal. Examples of neural programming include neural theorem provers,
neural Turing machines, and neural program inducers, e.g. Loos et al. (2017); Graves et al. (2014);
Neelakantan et al. (2015); Bosnjak et al. (2017); Allamanis et al. (2017). They aim to solve tasks
such as learning functions in logic, mathematics, or computer programs (e.g. logical or, addition, and
sorting), prove theorems and synthesize programs.
Most works on neural programming either rely only on black-box function evaluations (Graves et al.,
2014; Balog et al., 2017) or on the availability of detailed program execution traces, where entire
program runs are recorded under different input conditions (Reed & De Freitas, 2016; Cai et al.,
2017). Black-box function evaluations are easy to obtain since we only need to generate inputs and
outputs to various functions in the domain. However, by themselves, they do not result in powerful
generalizable models, since they do not have sufficient information about the underlying structure of
the domain. On the other hand, execution traces capture the underlying structure, but, are generally
harder to obtain under many different input conditions; even if they are available, the computational
complexity of incorporating them is significant. Due to the lack of good coverage, these approaches
fail to generalize to programs of higher complexity and to domains with a large number of functions.
Moreover, the performance of these frameworks is severely dependent on the nature of execution
traces: more efficient programs lead to a drastic improvement in performance (Cai et al., 2017), but
such programs may not be readily available.
In many problem domains, in addition to function evaluations, one typically has access to more
information such as symbolic representations that encode the relationships between the given variables
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
and functions in a succinct manner. For instance, in physical systems such as fluid dynamics or
robotics, the physical model of the world imposes constraints on the values that different variables
can take. Mathematics and logic are other domains in which expressions are inherently symbolic.
In the domain of programming languages, declarative languages explicitly declare variables in the
program. For instance, database query languages (e.g., SQL), regular expressions, and functional
programming. Declarative programs greatly simplify parallel programs through the generation of
symbolic computation graphs, and have thus been used in modern deep learning packages, such as
Theano, TensorFlow, and MxNet. Therefore, rich symbolic expression data is available for many
domains. We will show in this paper, that incorporating this type of information, as well as black-box
function evaluations, will result in models that are more generalizable.
Summary of Results: We introduce a flexible and a scalable neural programming framework that
combines the knowledge of symbolic expressions with black-box function evaluations. To our
knowledge, we are the first to consider such a combined framework. We demonstrate that this
approach outperforms existing methods by a significant margin, using only a small amount of training
data. The paper has three main contributions. (1) We design a neural architecture to incorporate
both symbolic expressions and black-box function evaluation data. (2) We evaluate it on tasks such
as equation verification and completion in the domain of mathematical equation modeling. (3) We
propose a data generation strategy for both symbolic expressions and black-box function evaluations
that results in good balance and coverage.
We consider learning mathematical equations and functions as a case study, since it has been used
extensively in previous neural programming works, e.g. Zaremba et al. (2014); Allamanis et al.
(2017); Loos et al. (2017). We employ tree LSTMs to incorporate the symbolic expression tree,
with one LSTM cell for each mathematical function. The parameters of the LSTM cells are shared
across different expressions, wherever the same function is used. This weight sharing allows us to
learn a large number of mathematical functions simultaneously, whereas most previous works aim
at learning only one or few mathematical functions. We then extend tree LSTMs to not only accept
symbolic expression input, but also numerical data from black-box function evaluations. We employ
tree encoding for numbers that appear in function evaluations, based on their decimal representation
(see Fig. 1c). This allows our model to generalize to unseen numbers, which has been a struggle for
neural programing researchers so far. We show that such a recursive neural architecture is able to
generalize to unseen numbers as well as to unseen symbolic expressions.
We evaluate our framework on two tasks: equation verification and completion. Under equation
verification, we further consider two sub-categories: verifying the correctness of a given symbolic
identity as a whole, or verifying evaluations of symbolic expressions under given numerical inputs.
Equation completion involves predicting the missing entry in a mathematical equation. This is
employed in applications such as mathematical question answering (QA). We establish that our
framework outperforms existing approaches on these tasks by a significant margin, especially in
terms of generalization to equations of higher depth and on domains with a large number of functions.
We propose a novel dataset generation strategy to obtain a balanced dataset of correct and incorrect
symbolic mathematical expressions and their numerical function evaluations. Previous methods do
an exhaustive search of all possible parse trees and are therefore, limited to symbolic trees of small
depth (Allamanis et al., 2017). Our dataset generation strategy relies on dictionary look-up and
sub-tree matching and can be applied to any domain by providing a basic set of axioms as inputs. Our
generated dataset has good coverage of the domain and is key to obtaining superior generalization
performance. We are also able to scale up our coverage to include about 3.5× mathematical functions
compared to the previous works (Allamanis et al., 2017; Zaremba et al., 2014).
Related work: Early work on automated programming used first order logic in computer algebra
systems such as Wolfram Mathematica and Sympy. However, these rule-based systems required
extensive manual input and could not be generalized to new programs. Graves et al. (2014) introduced
using memory in neural networks for learning functions such as grade-school addition and sorting.
Since then, many works have extended it to tasks such as program synthesis, program induction and
automatic differentiation (Bosnjak et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2017; Balog et al., 2017; Parisotto et al.,
2017; Reed & De Freitas, 2016; Mudigonda et al., 2017; Sajovic & Vuk, 2016; Piech et al., 2015).
Based on the type of data that is used to train the models, frameworks in neural programming
are categorized under 4 different classes. (1) Models that use black-box function evaluation data
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
(Graves et al., 2014; Balog et al., 2017; Parisotto et al., 2017; Zaremba et al., 2014), (2) models that
use program execution traces (Reed & De Freitas, 2016; Cai et al., 2017). (3) models that use a
combination of black-box input-output data and weak supervision from program sketches (Bosnjak
et al., 2017; Neelakantan et al., 2015) and finally (4) models that use symbolic data (Allamanis et al.,
2017; Loos et al., 2017). Our work is an extension of models of category 3 which uses symbolic data
instead of weak supervision. As stated in Section 1, an example of symbolic data is the computation
graph of a program which is different from program execution traces used in models of category 2
such as (Reed & De Freitas, 2016). These high-level symbolic expressions summarize the behavior
of the functions in the domain and apply to many groundings of different inputs as opposed to the
Neural Programmer-Interpreter (Reed & De Freitas, 2016). Therefore, we can obtain generalizable
models that are capable of function evaluation. Moreover, this combination allows us to scale up the
domain and model more functions as well as learn more complex structures.
One of the extensively studied applications of neural programming is reasoning with mathematical
equations. These works include automated theorem provers (Loos et al., 2017; Rocktaschel & Riedel,
2016; Yuan; Alemi et al., 2016; law Chojecki, 2017; Kaliszyk et al., 2017) or computer algebra-like
systems (Allamanis et al., 2017; Zaremba et al., 2014). Our work is closer to the latter, under this
categorization, however, the problem that we solve is in nature different. Allamanis et al. (2017) and
Zaremba et al. (2014) aim at simplifying mathematical equations by defining equivalence classes
of symbolic expressions that can be used in a symbolic solver. Our problem, on the other hand, is
mathematical equation verification and completion which has broader applicability, e.g. our proposed
model can be used in mathematical question answering systems.
Recent advances in symbolic reasoning and natural language processing have indicated the signifi-
cance of applying domain structure to the models to capture compositionality and semantics. Socher
et al. (2011; 2012) proposed tree-structured neural networks for natural language parsing and neural
image parsing. Cai et al. (2017) proposed using recursion for capturing the compositionality of
computer programs. Both Zaremba et al. (2014) and Allamanis et al. (2017) used tree-structured
neural networks for modeling mathematical equations. Tai et al. (2015) introduced tree-structured
LSTM for semantic relatedness in natural language processing. We will show that this powerful
model outperforms other tree-structured neural networks for validating mathematical equations.
2	Mathematic Equation Modeling
We now address the problem of modeling mathematical equations. Our goal is to verify the correctness
of a mathematical equation. This then enables us to perform equation completion. We limit ourselves
to the domain of trigonometry and elementary algebra in this paper.
In this section, we first discuss our grammar that explains the domain under our study. we later
describe how we generate a dataset of correct and incorrect symbolic equations within our grammar.
We talk about how we combine this data with a few input-output examples to enable function
evaluation. This dataset allows us to learn representations for the functions that capture their semantic
properties, i.e. how they relate to each other, and how they transform the input when applied. We
interchangeably use the word identity for referring to mathematical equations and input-output data
to refer to function evaluations.
2.1	Grammar
Let us start by defining our domain of the mathematical identities using the context-free grammar
notation. Identities (I), by definition, consist of two expressions that we are trying to verify (Eq. (1)).
A mathematical expression, represented by E in Eq. (2), is composed either of a terminal (T), such
as a constant or a variable, a unary function applied to any expression (F1), or a binary function
applied to two expression arguments (F2). Without loss of generality, functions that take more than
two arguments, i.e. n-ary functions with n > 2, are omitted from our task description, since n-ary
functions like addition can be represented as the composition of multiple binary addition functions.
Therefore, this grammar covers the entire space of trigonometric and elementary algebraic identities.
The trigonometry grammar rules are thus as follows:
I→=(E,E), 6=(E, E)
E →T,F1(E),F2(E,E)
(1)
(2)
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
(c) decimal tree for 2.5
Figure 1: Identities and their Expression Trees. with (a) a symbolic expression, (b) a function
evaluation, and (c) a number represented as the decimal tree (also part of the function evaluation data)
Table 1: Symbols in our grammar, i.e. the functions, variables, and constants
Unary functions, F1					Terminal, T		Binary, F2
sin	cos	csc	sec	tan	0	1	+
cot	arcsin	arccos	arccsc	arcsec	2	3	×
arctan	arccot	sinh	cosh	csch	4	10	∧
sech	tanh	coth	arsinh	arcosh	0.5	-1	
arcsch	arsech	artanh	arcoth	exp	0.4	0.7	
					π	x	
F1 → sin, cos, tan, . . .	(3)
F2 → +, ∧, ×, . . .	(4)
T → -1, 0, 1, 2, π, x, y, . . . , any number of precision 2 in [-3.14,+3.14]	(5)
Table 1 presents the complete list of functions and symbols as well as examples of the terminals
of the grammar. Note that we exclude subtraction and division because they can be represented
with addition, multiplication and power, respectively. Furthermore, the equations can have as many
variables as needed.
The above formulation provides a parse tree for any symbolic and function evaluation expression,
a crucial component for representing the equations in a model. Figure 1 illustrates 3 examples of
an identity in our grammar in terms of its expression tree. It is worth noting that there is an implicit
notion of depth of an identity in the expression tree. Since deeper equations are compositions of
multiple simpler equations, validating higher-depth identities requires reasoning beyond what is
required for identities with lower depths, and thus depth of an equation is somewhat indicative of
the complexity of the mathematical expression. However, depth is not sufficient; some higher depth
identities such as 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 4 may be much easier to verify than tan2 θ+ 1 = acos2 θ. Symbolic
and function evaluation expressions are differentiated by the type of their terminals. Symbolic
expressions have terminals of type constant or variable, whereas function evaluation expressions have
constants and numbers as terminals. We will come back to this distinction in section 3 where we
define our model. As shown in Table 1, our domain includes 28 functions. This scales up the domain
in comparison to the state-of-the-art methods that use up to 8 mathematical functions (Allamanis
et al., 2017; Zaremba et al., 2014). We will also show that our expressions are of higher complexity
as we consider equalities of depth up to 4, resulting in trees of size at most 31. Compared to the
state-of-the-art methods that use trees of size at most 13 (Allamanis et al., 2017).
Axioms: We refer to a small set of basic trigonometric and algebraic identities as axioms. These
axioms are gathered from the Wikipedia page on trigonometric identities1 as well as manually
specified ones covering elementary algebra. This set consists of about 140 identities varying in depth
from 1 to 7. Some examples of our axioms are (in ascending order of depth), x = x, x + y = y + x,
x × (y × z) = (x × y) × z, sin2 (θ) + cos2 (θ) = 1 and sin(3θ) = -4 sin3 (θ) + 3 sin(θ). These
axioms represent the basic properties of the mathematical functions in trigonometry and algebra,
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_trigonometric_identities
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
but do not directly specify their input/output behavior. The axioms, consisting of only positive (or
correct) identities, serve as a starting set for generating a dataset of mathematical identities.
2.2 Dataset of Mathematical Equations
In order to provide a challenging and accurate benchmark for our task, we need to create a large, varied
collection of correct and incorrect identities, in a manner that can be extended to other domains in
mathematics easily. Our approach is based on generating new mathematical identities by performing
local random changes to known identities, starting with 140 axioms described above. These changes
result in identities of similar or higher complexity (equal or larger depth), which may be correct or
incorrect, that are valid expressions within the grammar.
Generating Possible Identities: To generate a new identity, we select an equation at random from
the set of known equations, and make local changes to it. In order to do this, we first randomly select
a node in the expression tree, followed by randomly selecting one of the following actions to make
the local change to the equation at the selected node:
•	ShrinkNode: Replace the node, if it’s not a leaf, with one of its children, chosen randomly.
•	ReplaceNode: Replace the symbol at the node (i.e. the terminal or the function) with another
compatible one, chosen randomly.
•	GrowNode: Provide the node as input to another randomly drawn function f, which then
replaces the node. If f takes two inputs, the second input will be generated randomly from
the set of terminals.
•	GrowSides: If the selected node is an equality, either add or multiply both sides with a
randomly drawn number, or take both sides to the power of a randomly drawn number.
At the end of this procedure we use a symbolic solver, sympy (Meurer et al., 2017), to separate correct
equations from incorrect ones. Since we are performing the above changes randomly, the number of
generated incorrect equations are overwhelmingly larger than the number of correct identities. This
makes the training data highly unbalanced and is not desired. Therefore, we propose a method based
on sub-tree matching to generate new correct identities.
Generating Additional Correct Identities: In order to generate only correct identities, we follow
the same intuition as above, but only replace structure with others that are equal. In particular, we
maintain a dictionary of valid statements (mathDictionary) that maps a mathematical statement to
another. For example, the dictionary key x + y has value y + x. We use this dictionary in our correct
equation generation process where we look up patterns from the dictionary. More specifically, we
look for keys that match a subtree of the equation then replace that subtree with the pattern of the
value of the key. E.g. given input equation sin2(θ) + cos2 (θ) = 1, this subtree matching might
22
prouce equaty cos + sn ( ) = y nng ey-vaue par x + y : y + x.
The initial mathDictionaty is constructed from the input list of axioms. At each step of the equation
generation, we choose one equation at random from the list of correct equations so far, and choose a
random node n of this equation tree for changing. We look for a subtree rooted at n that matches one
or several dictionary keys. We randomly choose one of the matches and replace the subtree with the
value of the key by looking up the mathDictionary.
We generate all possible equations at a particular depth before proceeding to a higher depth. In order
to ensure this, we limit the depth of the final equation and only increase this limit if no new equations
are added to the correct equations for a number of repeats. Some examples of correct and incorrect
identities generated by out dataset generation method is given in Table 2.
Generating Function Evaluation data: We generate a few input-output examples from a specific
range of numbers for the functions in our domain. For unary functions, we randomly draw floating
point numbers of fixed precision in the range and evaluate the functions for the randomly drawn
number. For binary functions we repeat the same with two randomly generated numbers. Note that
function evaluation results in identities of depths 2 and 3.
Generating Numerical Expression Trees: Itis important for our dataset to also have a generalizable
representation of the numbers. We represent the floating point numbers with their decimal expansion
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Table 2: Examples of generated equations
Examples of correct identities ∣ Examples of incorrect identities
12 = x-1×0
(arctan 10)22 = (arctan 10)3+1
x × (-1 + x) = x × (x - 1)
x1 = x + 0
0.5x+2 = sin(0.5)x+2
π × csc(x) = - csc(x)
-4 = -4x
*2 ×√ = √
Is it true? (θɔ
θ	θ
Figure 2: Tree-structured recursive neural model, for the trees in Figure 1a (left) and 1b (right)
which is representable in our grammar. In order to make this clear, consider number 2.5. In order to
represent this number, we expand it into its decimal representation 2.5 = 2 × 100 + 5 × 10-1 and
feed this as one of the function evaluation expressions for training (Figure 1c). Therefore, we can
represent floating point numbers of finite precision using integers in the range [-1,10].
3	Tree LSTM Architecture for Modeling Equations
Analogous to how humans learn trigonometry and elementary algebra, we propose using basic axioms
to learn about the properties of mathematical functions. Moreover, we leverage the underlying
structure of each mathematical identity to make predictions about their validity. Both Zaremba et al.
(2014) and Allamanis et al. (2017) validate the effectiveness of using tree-structured neural networks
for modeling equations. Tai et al. (2015) show that Tree LSTMs are powerful models for capturing
the semantics of the data. Therefore, We use the Tree LSTM model to capture the compositionality of
the equation and show that it improves the performance over simpler tree-structured, a.k.a recursive,
neural networks. We describe the details of the model and training setup in this section.
Tree LSTM Model for Symbolic Expressions and Function Evaluations The structure of Tree
LSTM mirrors the parse-tree of each input equation. As shown in Figure 1, the input equation’s parse
tree is inherent in each equation. As described in section 2.1 an equation consists of terminals and
binary and unary functions. Terminals are input to Tree LSTM through the leaves that embeds their
representation using vectors. Each function is associated with an LSTM block with its own weights,
with the weights shared among all appearances of the function in different equations. we predict the
validity of each equation at the root of the tree.
The architecture of the neural network is slightly different for symbolic expressions compared to
function evaluation expressions. Recall from section 2.1, that the two are distinguished by their
terminal types. This directly reflects to the structure of the network used in the leaves for embedding.
Moreover, we use different loss functions for each type of expression as described below.
•	Symbolic expressions These expressions consist of constants and symbols. These terminals
are represented with their one-hot encoding and are passed through symbol, a single layer
neural network block. The validity of a symbolic expression is verified by computing the
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
dot product of the left-hand-side and right-hand-side vector embeddings and applying the
logistic function.
•	function evaluation expressions In order to encode the terminals of function evaluation
expressions we train an autoencoder. The encoder side embeds the floating point numbers
into a high-dimensional vector space. We call this a number block. The decoder of this
auto-encoder is trained for predicting the floating point number given an input embedding.
We call this the decoder block. We pass the output vector embedding of the left-hand-side
and right-hand-side to the decoder block. The validity of a function evaluation is then
computed by minimizing the MSE loss of the decoder outputs of each side.
Figure 2 illustrates our tree LSTM structure constructed from the parse-tree of the equations in
Figures 1a and 1b. 2
Baseline Models We compare our proposed model with chain-structured neural networks, such as
sequential Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), LSTMS’s as well as tree-structured neural networks
(TreeNN’s) consisting of fully connected layers (Socher et al., 2011; Zaremba et al., 2014). It should
be noted that both these papers discover equivalence classes in a dataset, and since our data consists
of many equivalence classes especially for the function evaluation data, we do not use the EqNet
model proposed in (Allamanis et al., 2017) as a baseline. Another baseline we have used is Sympy.
Given each equality, Sympy either returns True, or False, or returns the input equality in its original
form (indicating that sympy is incapable of deciding whether the equality holds or not). Let’s call
this the Unsure class. In the reported Sympy accuracies we have treated the Unsure class as a
miss-classification. It should be noted, however, that Since Sympy is used at time of data generation
to verify the correctness of the generated equations, its accuracy for predicting correct equations in
our dataset is always 100%. Therefore, the degradation in Sympy’s performance in Table 3 is only
due to incorrect equations. It is interesting to see Sympy’s performance when another oracle is used
for validating correct equalities.
As we will show in the experiments, the structure of the network is crucial for equation verification
and equation completion. Moreover, by adding function evaluation data to the tree-structured models
we show that using this type of data not only broadens the applicability of the model to enable
function evaluation, but it also enhances the final accuracy of the symbolic expressions compared to
when no function evaluation data is used.
We demonstrate that Tree LSTMs outperform Tree NN’s by a large margin with or without function
evaluation data in all the experiments. We attribute this to the fact that LSTM cells ameliorate
vanishing and exploding gradients along paths in the tree compared to fully-connected blocks used
in Tree NNs. This enables the model to be capable of reasoning in equations of higher depth where
reasoning is a more difficult task compared to an equation of lower depth. Therefore, it is important
to use both a tree and a cell with memory, such as an LSTM cell for modeling the properties of
mathematical functions.
Implementation Details Our neural networks are developed using MxNet (Chen et al., 2015). All
the experiments and models are tuned over the same search space and the reported results are the
best achievable prediction accuracy for each method. We use L2-regularization as well as dropout to
avoid overfitting, and train all the models for 100 epochs. We have tuned for the hidden dimension
{10,20,50}, the optimizers {SGD, NAG (Nesterov accelerated SGD), RMSProp, Adam, AdaGrad,
AdaDelta, DCASGD, SGLD (Stochastic Gradient Riemannian Langevin Dynamics)}, dropout rate
{0.2,0.3}, learning rate {10-3, 10-5}, regularization ratio {10-4, 10-5} and momentum {0.2,0.7}.
Most of the networks achieved their best performance using Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014)
with a learning rate of 0.001 and a regularization ratio of 10-5. Hidden dimension and dropout varies
under each of the scenarios.
4	Experiments and Results
We indicate the complexity of an identity by its depth. We setup the following experiments to evaluate
the performance and the generalization capability of our proposed framework. We investigate the
2Our dataset generation method, proposed model, and data is available here: https://github.com/
ForoughA/neuralMath
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Table 3: Generalization Results: the train and the test contain equations of the same depth [1,2,3,4].
Results are on unseen equations. Sym refers to accuracy of Symbolic expressions and F Eval refers to
MSE of function evaluation expressions. The last four columns measure the accuracy of symbolic
expressions of different depths.
Approach	Sym	F Eval	depth 1	depth 2	depth 3	depth 4
Test set size	3527	401	7	542	2416	563
Majority Class	50.24	-	28.57	45.75	52.85	43.69
Sympy	81.74	-	85.71	89.11	82.98	69.44
RNN	66.37	-	57.14	62.93	65.13	72.32
LSTM	81.71	-	85.71	79.49	80.81	83.86
TreeNN	92.06	-	100.0	95.37	94.16	87.45
TreeLSTM	95.18	-	85.71	96.50	95.07	94.50
TreeNN + data	93.60	0.191	100.0	94.1	93.13	95.11
TreeLSTM + data	97.20	0.047	71.42	98.29	97.45	96.00
behavior of the learned model on two different tasks of equation verification and equation completion.
Under both tasks, We assess the results of the method on symbolic as well as function evaluation
expressions. We compare each of the models with sequential Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN),
LSTMs and recursive tree neural networks also knows as Tree NN’s. Moreover, we show the effect
of adding function evaluation data to the final accuracy on symbolic expressions. All the models train
on the same dataset of symbolic expressions. Models, Tree LSTM + data and Tree NN + data use
function evaluation data on top of the symbolic data.
Our dataset consists of 17632 symbolic equations, 8902 of which are correct. This data includes
39 equations of depth 1, 2547 equations of depth 2, 12217 equations of depth 3 and 2836 equations
of depth 4. It should be noted that the equations of depth 1 and 2 have been maxed out in the data
generation. We also add 2000 function evaluation equations and decimal expansion trees for numbers
that includes 1029 correct samples. We have 2 equations of depth 1, 831 equations of depth 2 and
1128 equations of depth 3 in this function evaluation dataset. Our numerical data includes 30% of
numbers of precision 2 in the range [-3.14, 3.14] chosen at random.
Equation Verification - Generalization to Unseen Identities: In this experiment we randomly
split all of the generated data that includes equations of depths 1 to 4 into train and test partitions with
an 80%/20% split ratio. We evaluate the accuracy of the predictions on the held-out data. The results
of this experiment are presented in Table 3. As it can be seen, tree structured networks are able to
make better predictions compared to chain-structured or flat networks. Therefore, we are leveraging
the structure of the identities to capture information about their validity. Moreover, the superiority of
Tree LSTM to Tree NN shows that it is important to incorporate cells that have memory. The detailed
prediction accuracy broken in terms of depth and also in terms of symbolic and function evaluation
expressions is also given in Table 3.
Equation Verification - Extrapolation to Unseen Depths: Here we evaluate the generalization of
the learned model to equations of higher and lower complexity. Generalization to equations of higher
depth indicates that the network has been able to learn the properties of each mathematical function
and is able to use this in more complex equations to verify their correctness. Ability to generalize to
lower complexity indicates whether the model can infer properties of simpler mathematical functions
by observing their behavior in complex equations. For each setup, we hold out symbolic expressions
of a certain depth and train on the remaining depths. Table 4 presents the results of both setups,
which suggest that Tree LSTM trained on a combination of symbolic and function evaluation data,
outperforms all other methods across all metrics. Comparing the symbolic accuracy of Tree models
with and without the function evaluation data, we conclude that our models are able to utilize the
patterns in the function evaluations to improve and better model the symbolic expressions as well.
Equation Completion: In this experiment, we evaluate the capability of the model in completing
equations by filling in a blank in unseen identities. For this experiment, we use the same models as
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Table 4: Extrapolation Evaluation to measure capability of the model to generalize to unseen depth
on symbolic equations
Approach	Train depth:1,2,3; Test depth: 4			Train depth:1,3,4; Test depth: 2		
	Accuracy	Precision	Recall	Accuracy	Precision	Recall
Majority Class	55.22	0	0	56.21	0	0
RNN	65.15	68.61	75.51	71.27	82.98	43.27
LSTM	76.40	71.62	78.35	79.31	75.27	79.31
TreeNN	88.36	87.87	85.86	92.58	89.04	94.71
TreeLSTM	93.27	90.20	95.33	94.78	94.15	93.90
TreeNN + data	93.34	90.34	95.33	93.36	89.75	95.78
TreeLSTM + data	96.17	92.97	97.15	97.37	96.08	96.86
8070s50
30
2	4	6	8	10
k
(a) Symbolic equation completion
Figure 3: Evaluating Equation Completion, Figure 3a shows the top-k accuracy of the symbolic
data for different methods, and Figure 3b illustrates the minimum MSE of the top-k predictions, for
the function evaluation data.
4 3 2
山 s≡C-E ¥doH
o
O 5	10	15	20	25	30	35	40
k
(b) Function evaluation completion
reported in table 3. We take all the test equations and randomly choose a node of depth either 1 or 2
in each equation, and replace it with all possible configurations of depth 1 and 2 expressions from
our grammar. We then give this set of equations to the models and look at the top-k predictions for
the blank ranked by the model’s confidence. We perform equation completion on both symbolic and
function evaluation expressions.
Figure 3a shows the accuracy of the top-k predictions vs. k, for the symbolic expressions. We define
the top-k accuracy as the percentage of samples for which there is at least one correct match for
the blank in the top k predictions. This indicates that the hardest task is to have a high accuracy for
k = 1. Therefore, as in Fig 3a, the differences at k = 1 for models that use function evaluation data
vs. models that do not, indicates the importance of combining symbolic and function evaluation data
for the task of equation completion. We can also see that tree-structured models are substantially
better than sequential models, indicating that it is important to capture the compositionality of the
data in the structure of the model. Finally, Tree LSTM shows superior performance compared to Tree
NN under both scenarios.
Figure 3b evaluates equation completion on function evaluation expressions by measuring the top-k
minimum MSE for different ks. We define the top-k minimum MSE as the MSE between the true
value of the blank and the closest prediction to the true value among the top-k predictions. Similar
to the top-k accuracy, the hardest task is to have a low MSE for k = 1 since it indicates that the
correct prediction is the first model prediction. We would like to note that, for function evaluation
expressions, there is only one correct prediction for a blank, whereas for symbolic expressions, there
may be many correct candidates for a specific blank. This evaluation is performed only for models
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
4tanh(0) = x
pred	prob
-20	0.9999
10	0.9999
70	0.9999
-30	0.999
80	0.999
60	0.999
2.50	0.999
90	0.999
50	0.999
(a) Symbolic Equation
cos(-) = -0.57
pred	modelErr	trueErr
3	1.8e-5	1.7e-1
2.17	1.9e-5	9.9e-5
2.16	2.6e-5	3.9e-4
2.18	1.9e-4	0
2.15	2.1e-4	3.9e-4
2.19	5.5e-4	1.0e-4
2.2	1.0e-3	4.0e-4
2.13	1.1e-3	1.6e-3
2.12	1.8e-3	2.5e-3
(b) Function Evaluation
(c) Function evaluation for cos
Figure 4: Examples of Equation Completion of the Tree LSTM + data model. Figures 4a and 4b
show examples of equation completion from the test set where the predictions are ranked by model’s
confidence and the correct prediction is shown in boldface. Figure 4c depicts the predicted values of
cos(x) with blue dots for x in [-3.14,3.14] in the test set
that use function evaluation data. We can see from the figure, that Tree LSTM’s MSE is better that
that of Tree NN across all ks.
We present examples of equations and generated candidates in Figures 4a and 4b for the Tree LSTM
+ data model. Figure 4a presents the results on a symbolic equation for which the correct prediction
value is 1. The Tree LSTM is able to generate many candidates with a high confidence, all of which
are correct. Column prob in the figure is the output probability of softmax which indicates the
model’s confidence in its prediction. On the other hand, in Figure 4b, we show a function evaluation
example, where the correct answer is 2.18 rounded to precision 2. The correct answer is among the
top predictions as shown in Figure 4b. All the predicted values for the blank are listed in column pred
ranked by the model’s prediction confidence. Column modelErr shows the model’s confidence of
prediction, which is the squared error between the predicted value of cos(-pred) and -0.57. Column
trueErr is the squared error between the true value of cos(-pred) rounded to precision 2 and -0.57.
As it is shown, the predicted candidates are close to the true value. It is worth noting that for the
function evaluation task of Figure 4b, there is only 1 correct answer, whereas for the task in Figure 4a
there can be many correct solutions. We also present example predictions of our model for function
evaluations by plotting the top predicted values for cos on samples of test data in Figure 4c.
5	Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we proposed combining black-box function evaluation data with symbolic expressions
to improve the accuracy and broaden the applicability of previously proposed models in this domain.
We apply this to the novel task of validating and completing mathematical equations. We studied the
space of trigonometry and elementary algebra as a case study to validate the proposed model. We
also proposed a novel approach for generating a dataset of mathematical identities and generated
identities in trigonometry and elementary algebra. As noted, our data generation technique is not
limited to trigonometry and elementary algebra. We show that under various experimental setups,
Tree LSTMs trained on a combination of symbolic expressions and black-box function evaluation
achieves superior results compared to the state-of-the-art models.
In our future work we will expand our testbed to include other mathematical domains, inequalities,
and systems of equations. What is interesting about multiple domains is to investigate if the learned
representations for one domain can be transfered to the other domains, and whether the embedding of
each domain are clustered close to each other similar to the way the word embedding vectors behave.
We are also interested in exploring recent neural models with addressable differentiable memory, in
order to evaluate whether they can handle equations of much higher complexity.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Amazon Inc., for the AWS credits. F. Arabshahi is supported by
DARPA Award D17AP00002. A. Anandkumar is supported by Microsoft Faculty Fellowship, NSF
CAREER Award CCF-1254106, DARPA Award D17AP00002 and Air Force Award FA9550-15-1-
0221. S. Singh would like to thank Adobe Research and FICO for supporting this research.
References
Alex A. Alemi, Francois Chollet, Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, and Josef Urban. DeePmath
- deep sequence models for premise selection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2016.
Miltiadis Allamanis, Pankajan Chanthirasegaran, Pushmeet Kohli, and Charles Sutton. Learning
continuous semantic rePresentations of symbolic exPressions. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Matej Balog, Alexander L Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow.
DeePcoder: Learning to write Programs. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2017.
Matko Bosnjak, Tim Rocktaschel, Jason Naradowsky, and Sebastian Riedel. Programming with a
differentiable forth interPreter. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Jonathon Cai, Richard Shin, and Dawn Song. Making neural Programming architectures generalize
via recursion. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Tianqi Chen, Mu Li, Yutian Li, Min Lin, Naiyan Wang, Minjie Wang, Tianjun Xiao, Bing Xu,
Chiyuan Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Mxnet: A flexible and efficient machine learning library for
heterogeneous distributed systems. 2015.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
Cezary Kaliszyk, Francois Chollet, and Christian Szegedy. Holstep: A machine learning dataset for
higher-order logic theorem Proving. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2017.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Przemys law Chojecki. Deepalgebra-an outline of a program. AITP 2017, 2017.
Sarah Loos, Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, and Cezary Kaliszyk. Deep network guided proof
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06972, 2017.
Aaron Meurer, Christopher P Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondrej Certik, Sergey B Kirpichev, Matthew
Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K Moore, Sartaj Singh, et al. Sympy: symbolic
computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e103, 2017.
Pawan Mudigonda, R Bunel, A Desmaison, MP Kumar, P Kohli, and PHS Torr. Learning to
superoptimize programs. 2017.
Arvind Neelakantan, Quoc V Le, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural programmer: Inducing latent programs
with gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04834, 2015.
Emilio Parisotto, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Rishabh Singh, Lihong Li, Dengyong Zhou, and Pushmeet
Kohli. Neuro-symbolic program synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), 2017.
Chris Piech, Jonathan Huang, Andy Nguyen, Mike Phulsuksombati, Mehran Sahami, and Leonidas
Guibas. Learning program embeddings to propagate feedback on student code. In International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Scott Reed and Nando De Freitas. Neural programmer-interpreters. International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
Tim Rocktaschel and Sebastian Riedel. Learning knowledge base inference with neural theorem
provers. Proceedings of AKBC, pp. 45-50, 2016.
Ziga Sajovic and Martin Vuk. Operational calculus on programming spaces and generalized tensor
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07690, 2016.
Richard Socher, Cliff C Lin, Chris Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. Parsing natural scenes and natural
language with recursive neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 129-136, 2011.
Richard Socher, Brody Huval, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. Semantic compositionality
through recursive matrix-vector spaces. In Proceedings of the 2012 joint conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing and computational natural language learning, pp. 1201-
1211. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.
Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Improved semantic representations from
tree-structured long short-term memory networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pp. 1556-1566, 2015.
Dustin Tran, Matthew D Hoffman, Rif A Saurous, Eugene Brevdo, Kevin Murphy, and David M
Blei. Deep probabilistic programming. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2017.
Arianna Yuan. Neural theorem prover.
Wojciech Zaremba, Karol Kurach, and Rob Fergus. Learning to discover efficient mathematical
identities. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1278-1286, 2014.
12