Table 1:	Training and test set sizes for the same/different discrimination task.
Table 2:	Training and test set sizes for the RMTS task.
Table 3:	Training and test set sizes for the distribution-of-three task.
Table 4:	Training and test set sizes for the identity rules task.
Table 5: Learning rates for all models trained without TCN.
Table 6: Default number of training epochs for all tasks and regimes.
Table 7: Number of training epochs for the PrediNet and RN on the distribution-of-three task.
Table 8: Number of training epochs for the PrediNet, RN, and Transformer on the identity rulestask.
Table 9: Results for same/different task. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trainednetworks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 10: Results for relational match-to-sample task. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10trained networks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 11: Results for distribution-of-three task. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trainednetworks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 12: Results for identity rules task. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trainednetworks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 13:	Results for the RN on the distribution-of-three and identity rules tasks when trained on alarger training set. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks (± the standarderror of the mean).
Table 14:	Results for the TRN on the distribution-of-three and identity rules tasks. Results reflecttest accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 15:	Results for same/different task with convolutional (conv), multilayer perceptron (MLP),or random (rand) encoders. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks (± thestandard error of the mean).
Table 16: Results for relational match-to-sample task with convolutional (conv), multilayer per-ceptron (MLP), or random (rand) encoders. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trainednetworks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 17: Results for distribution-of-three task with convolutional (conv), multilayer perceptron(MLP), or random (rand) encoders. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks(± the standard error of the mean).
Table 18:	Results for identity rules task with convolutional (conv), multilayer perceptron (MLP),or random (rand) encoders. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks (± thestandard error of the mean).
Table 19:	Results for the confidence ablation experiment. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over10 trained networks (± the standard error of the mean).
Table 20:	Results on the same/different task for the ESBN model with a learned default memoryinstead of confidence values. Results reflect test accuracy averaged over 10 trained networks (± thestandard error of the mean).
