Table 1: Execution time comparison. Results arecalculated on the time to produce the interactionmatrix (including all features) for a single sample,as measured by seconds per sample.
Table 2: Post-hoc accuracy of BivShap-S aftermasking H-source nodes, representing featureswith minimal redundancies, and H-sink nodes,representing directionally redundant features.
Table 3: Summary of the datasets and models in our investigationlayers of 200 hidden units, batch normalization, and relu activation. The model is trained using Adam(Kingma & Ba, 2017) with learning rate 10-3 for 800 epochs, achieving a test accuracy of 88.2%.
Table 4: IRB Information for COPDGene DatasetG.1.4 Licenses for COPDGene DataAll participants provided their informed consent, and IRB approval was obtained from all concernedinstitutions. IRB information is provided in Tab. 4.
Table 5: Influential Feature Evaluation through Insertion and Deletion AUC. We calculate a featureranking by applying PageRank on the G graph, iteratively removing the most influential feature, thenevaluating AUC on the resulting curve. Note that we cannot run Sh-Tay and Sh-Exc methods on theCOPD dataset due to their computational issues with the large number of features.
Table 6: Accuracy results for masking redundant features as identified using PageRank on graph G .
Table 7: Posthoc-accy of BivShap-S and BivShap-K after masking H-source nodes, representingfeatures with minimal redundancies, and H-sink nodes, representing directionally redundant features.
Table 8: Time comparison in seconds per data sample for the methods used for the post-hoc accuracyand AUC calculations. Fields indicated by * which were averaged over 5 samples due to computationalcost, otherwise time calculations were averaged over 500 samples (or the total number of test samplesif fewer than 500)dataset has less than 500 samples total), except for the fields indicated by * which were averagedover 5 samples due to computational cost.
Table 9: GO enrichment results for the redundancy-based ranking of graph G for Smoker andNonsmoker subgroups. Gene pathways with q-value < 0.05 are bolded.
