Figure 1: Robot Fish setting. The fish is half full/hungry, F = 0.5. Left: no food. Middle: food onenv3, thus “food there” neuron lights up. Right: food on env1, thus “food here” neuron lights up.
Figure 2: FishNN architecture, δ > 0 a small value.
Figure 3: (A) plot of energy (F , blue) and food availability (red) for untrained model. SRD-trainedmodel at its early stage looks almost identical. (B) same as (A) but after 12000 SRD trainingiterations. (C) Average energy of SRD-trained fish model.
Figure 4: Robot2NN and PFC. Robot2NN makes 2D robot’s action decisions. xattn (the whole vis-ible map) and wself (the agent’s position) are the direct input to the model. In v1 , vΣ, red values arepositive (desirable), white zero and blue negative (not desirable). 2D robot’s PFC (green dotted box)resembles RobotFish’s PFC in their function of accumulating decision values. [wgrass]14, [wgrass]23are examples of strong activations that are interpretable through tile-based module.
Figure 5: (A) Initial parameters; all deconvs in all DeconvSeq are initialized to the same 3x3 weightswith center max value of 1 and 0.1 elsewhere. (B) Once trained, variations of weights are observedfor Project A expt 1 (all 180 parameters are shown). (C) Similar to (B) but for project Compare A.
Figure 6: (A) A sample trajectory from Project A. (B) Cumulative histogram of the no. of tilestraversed by robot in Project A. Steeper histogram indicates that less tiles of the type are beingtraversed (for grass, steeper is better) (C) A sample trajectory from Compare A. (D) Similar to B,but for robot in Compare A.
Figure 7: (A) A sample trajectory from Lava A. (B) A sample trajectory from Lava NOAV A. A lavatile is traversed. (C) Cumulative histogram of the no. of tiles traversed by robot in Lava A. Almostzero lava tiles are traversed. (D) Similar to (B) but for Lava NOAV A, in which some lava tiles aretraversed.
Figure 8: Project B cumulative histograms.
Figure 9: Weights for (A) Project Lava A expt 1 (B) Project Lava NOAV A expt 1 (C) Lava A expt4.
Figure 10: Weights for failure modes (A) Project Compare A expt 2 (B) Project Compare A expt 4.
