Figure 1: Section of Methodus Plantarum Sexualis,Georg Ehret, illustrating Linnaeus’s Systema Naturae,1735. Class defining attributes need not be exclusive oruniversal, and useful classifications may be contextual.
Figure 2: Confidence heatmaps and decision boundaries of prototype and attention classifiers on 2-variable Boolean functions. The attention classifier shown uses a temperature of 1, lower temperatures‘harden’ the classification and produce decision boundaries more closely aligned with the axes (seeAppendix B). As XOR(x, y) is not a threshold function, simple prototypes fail to produce a correctclassification scheme, in this case the prototypes are equal (= (0, 0)) and there is no decision boundary.
Figure 3:	A non-threshold function of 2-variables, the pseudo-variable solution, and PrototypicalNetwork performance on the XOR2 problem. (a) XOR(x, y), which does not have a threshold solutionin 2 dimensions. (b) Appending the pseudo-variable XOR(x, y) gives a 3-dimensional embedding inwhich all 2-variable Boolean functions have threshold solutions. XOR(x, y) is a pseudo-variable inthat it is determined by the other variables and cannot freely vary, for example the hatched circle at(1, 0, 0) cannot occur. Right: Accuracy of prototypical networks for the XOR2 problem over sequencelength and embedding dimension. Mean over 1000 tasks, |S| = 40. See Appendix F for details.
Figure 4:	Feature values and attention coefficients during the feature-selection self-attention (n ={0, 5, 10, 25}) within a class of XOR3 . Nodes depict examples of the support set: the colour of theleft halves represents the active features; the right halves represents the magnitude of the irrelevantfeatures. Edge width and opacity indicate the attention strength between a pair of nodes. The red,green, blue and white groups, different variants, automatically segregate which preserves their activefeatures while the irrelevant features converge, as shown in the feature scores beneath each plot. Inthis way, the active features identify themselves.
Figure 5: Attention classification of the XOR4 problem over variant frequency, r, and numberof inactive components β. Increasing r assists feature selection, in agreement with the derivedmisclassification distribution. Soft feature-selection rescales features according to their scores, asdetermined by the proposed self-attention procedure. This greatly improves performance even at lowrepetitions, for example at 2 repetitions and 3 inactive components the change in accuracy is +38pp.
Figure 6: Polythetic MNIST (colourless) by polythetic proportionduring training. FS matches or outperforms the other models atall training proportions and is far less affected by the training mix.
Figure 7: Changes in confidence and decision boundary of the attention classifier with temperature forAND(x, y).
Figure 8: Comparing soft and top-k feature selection in the same setting as Figure 5: classificationof XOR4 over variant frequency, r, and number of inactive components β . Examples of a variantsatisfy the XOR in the same Way, i.e. the active components are equal, but may not have the sameinactive components. The top-k version uses a binary mask to leave the k highest scoring featuresunchanged and zeroing the rest. This produces significant improvements over even the soft featureselection method at high values of β, but requires knoWledge of the number of active elements.
Figure 9: Feature vectors converging under iterated self-attention on a XOR2 classification of vectorsuniformly sampled over the sphere, in 3D (top) and down the z-axis (bottom). Colours indicate classes.
Figure 10: Diagram of the proposed approach. Note how the misleading features of stripes and spots,which may cause misclassification, are diluted through the feature selection process.
Figure 11:	Example of an XORα task with α = 2 active components (3rd and 5th bits), β = 3 noisybits, and r = 1 repetitions for each combination of active components. The support and query setscontain r2α examples each.
Figure 12:	Example of an MNIST polythetic task. Examples from class 0 have either digit 1 (in anycolour) in the bottom-left corner with a red digit in the bottom-right corner (top row); or digit 6 in thebottom-left corner with a green digit in the bottom-right (bottom row). Examples from class 1 canhave either digit 1 in the bottom-left with a green digit in the bottom-right (top row); or digit 6 in thebottom-left with a red digit in the bottom-right corner (bottom row).
Figure 13: Example of the support set for a polythetic MNIST task (clean).
Figure 14: Example of the support set for a polythetic MNIST task (colourless).
Figure 15: Example of the support set for a polythetic MNIST task (full).
