Figure 1: An intuitive example. Red/greenlines denote good/bad exploration policies.
Figure 2: How OVD-Explorer explores (a) op-timistically about epistemic uncertainty and (b)pessimistically about aleatoric uncertainty.
Figure 3: GridChaos. (a) The cyan triangle can move to reach the goal at the top right. (b) Theperformance on it. (c) The values about uncertainty and exploration objective (mutual information).
Figure 4: Training curves on (a) Ant-v2 and (b) Noisy Ant-v2. The x-axis indicates the number oftraining epochs, while the y-axis is the evaluation result represented by the average episode return.
Figure 5: Map of GridChaos.
Figure 6: Runtime analysis. The data is from 1trial of each algorithm on Noisy Ant-v2 task, andthe errorbar represents half of the standard devia-tion.
Figure 7: State visiting frequency heatmap from 1.0 × 105 to 2.5 × 105 steps of one trial for (a)OVD-Explorer, (b) DSAC and (c) DOAC. (d) Estimated aleatoric uncertainty of OVD-Explorer; (e)Epistemic-aleatoric ratio of OVD-Explorer; (f) Estimated uncertainty for exploration in DOAC.
Figure 8:	Training curves on GridChaos with noise of different scale. The x-axis indicates numberof training epoch (100 environment steps for each training epoch), while the y-axis is the evaluationresult represented by average episode return. The shaded region denotes half standard deviation ofaverage evaluation over 5 seeds. Curves are smoothed uniformly for visual clarity. These results arecorresponding to row A to row E in Table 5.
Figure 9:	Training curves on Noisy Ant-v2 tasks with different maximum episodic length setup. Thex-axis indicates number of training epoch (the number of environment steps for each training epochis the same as the episodic horizon), while the y-axis is the evaluation result represented by averageepisode return. The shaded region denotes half standard deviation of average evaluation over 5seeds. Curves are smoothed uniformly for visual clarity. The sub-title of each figure represents theepisodic horizon, also known as the maximum episode length.
Figure 10:	Sensitivity to β. The x-axis indicates different β settings, while the y-axis is the evalua-tion result represented by average episode return in the last epoch before totally 1250 epoch. Errorbars indicate half standard deviation of average evaluation over 5 seeds. The 11 different β valuesare 0.05, 0.1, 0.6, 1.2, 1.8, 2.4, 3.2, 3.6, 4.8, 6.0, 8.0.
Figure 11:	Training curves on Noisy Ant-v2 with different estimation of Zπ . The x-axis indicatesnumber of training epoch (100 environment steps for each training epoch), while the y-axis is theevaluation result represented by average episode return. The shaded region denotes half standarddeviation of average evaluation over 5 seeds. Curves are smoothed uniformly for visual clarity.
Figure 12: The statistical analysis for the training process, With the aleatoric uncertainty around thegoal is set loWer.
Figure 13: The statistical analysis for the training process, With the aleatoric uncertainty around thegoal is set higher.
