Figure 1: Performance of random noise, FGSM, PGD,and UAP With and Without derivative loss term.
Figure 2: A successful attack (a) Without and (b) With derivative loss term (PGD, =10mV). The backgroundtraces shoW the original signal before the preprocessing filter.
Figure 3: A successful attack with derivative loss term and spatial constraints λm = 1 and λd = 0.563 (PGD,=50mV). The background traces show the original signal before the preprocessing filter.
Figure 4: ASR of PGD and UAP in Case 2), i.e., computed With head model(W/HM), and in Case 3), i.e., computed Without head model (W/oHM).
Figure 5: ASR With thePGD attack propagating fromdifferent EEG channels Withfixed λd=0.3 and variable λm .
Figure 6:	Practical adversarial attack scenario in BCIs: a smart device close to the ear emits a perturbationsignal which propagates over the head surface to the EEG electrodes.
Figure 7:	Magnitude of the spatial propagation for different λm . The perturbation is emitted from the left sideof the head and propagates over the head surface. The leftmost electrode senses the highest magnitude (red),which linearly decreases towards zero (white) with growing propagation distance and λm . The electrodes whichsense the perturbations, i.e., magnitude >0, are marked with dots. The electrodes T9, C3, C4, and T10 are labeledfor reference.
Figure 8: ASR on BCI Competition IV-2a with random noise, FGSM, PGD, and UAP with and withoutderivative loss term.
Figure 9: Results on BCI Competition IV-2a. ASR of PGD and UAP in Case 2), i.e., computed with head model(W/HM); and in Case 3), i.e., computed Without head model (W/oHM).
Figure 10: PoWer spectral density comparison of the attack With and Without derivative loss term, as Well as theoriginal signal shoWn in Figure 2.
Figure 11: Confusion matrix original EEG predictions on Physionet dataset.
Figure 12: Confusion matrices for the Physionet dataset after attacking EEGNet with the proposed PGD attackwith derivative and considering the spatial propagation. The attack is either performed from the left electrode(T9) or from the right electrode (T10). We consider different magnitude propagation parameters λm and aconstant delay parameter λd=0.3.
Figure 13: A successful PGD attack on Physionet dataset (i) without and (ii) with derivative with differentvalues of maximum amplitude .
