Figure 1: Baseline slicer.
Figure 2: The relative improvement of our policy over baseline.
Figure 3: Representative deposited patterns from the evaluation dataset.
Figure 4: The relative improvement of our policy over baseline.
Figure 5: Infill comparison.
Figure 6: Performance of our policy and baseline with varying viscosity.
Figure 9: The relative improvement of our policy over baseline.
Figure 10: Deposition quality estimation of physical result manufactured with baseline and ourlearned policy.
Figure 11: The printing apparatus consisting of a 3-axis Cartesian robot, a direct write printing head,and a camera setup.
Figure 12:	The calibration of the imaging setup. First intrinsic parameters are estimated from cal-ibration patterns. Next we compute the extrinsic calibration by calculating homographies betweenthe cameras and an overhead view. We extract the masks by thresholding a photo of the nozzle. Thefinal stitched image consists of 4 regions: (1) view only in left camera, (2) view only in right camera,(3) view in both cameras, (4) view in no camera. The final stitched image is show on the right.
Figure 13:	Calibration images for correlating deposited material thickness with optical intensity andthe corresponding fit.
Figure 14: Baseline controller starts by estimating the width w of the deposited material. A controlsequence for the nozzle is estimated by offsetting the desired shape by half the size of material width.
Figure 15: Control Policy Input.
Figure 16: The action space.
Figure 17: Discretization.
Figure 18: Orientation.
Figure 19: We performed nine printouts and measured the width variation at specified locations. Wefit the measured data with an LPC model. Please note that since our model is generative, we do notexactly match the data or any observed resemblance is a testament to the quality of our predictor.
Figure 20: The reward function.
Figure 21: Models in our curriculum. For a full view of exemplar slices please see the supplementarymaterial.
Figure 22:	Training curves for controllers with constant material flow.
Figure 23:	Training curves for controllers with increasing viscosity in an environment with noisyflow.
Figure 24:	Training curves for controllers with variable material flow.
Figure 25: Exemplar models from the evaluation dataset.
Figure 26:	Printouts realized using control policies recovered with Bayesian optimization (left andmiddle, blue square marks the optimized slice) compared to our trained policy (right).
Figure 27:	We compare the baseline policy and our three learned policies on materials with varyingviscosity.
Figure 28: Policy evaluation on physical hardware.
