Figure 1: Aleatoric (left) and epistemic (right) uncertainty estimation. Yellow indicates a largeestimated uncertainty and blue indicates a small estimated uncertainty.
Figure 2: Selective prediction on MNIST with EMNIST letters as OOD data. Left: risk-coverage plotsfor off-the-shelf models trained with softmax cross-entropy. Right: models trained with uncertaintypropagation. The grey line indicates perfect prediction. Results averaged over 10 runs.
Figure 3: Robustness of CNNs on the MNIST data set against Gaussian noise (left) as well as PGDadversarial noise (right). The continuous lines show the test accuracy and the dashed lines show therobust accuracy. The black lines indicate the softmax cross-entropy trained baseline. Results areaveraged over 3 runs. Results on CIFAR-10 and further settings are in Supplementary Material C.2.
Figure 4: Illustration of parametric approximations of ReLU. In each plot, the gray distribution is theinput and the green distribution is the true output distribution. The red distributions (top) are our locallinearization approximation. The orange distributions (bottom) are produced by moment matching.
Figure 5: Robustness of CNNs on the MNIST data set against Gaussian noise (left) as well asPGD adversarial noise (right). While Fig. 3 presents σ = 0.5 and e = 16/255, this figure presentsσ = 0.75 and e = 8/255 The continuous lines show the test accuracy and the dashed lines show therobust accuracy. The black lines indicate the softmax cross-entropy trained baseline. Results areaveraged over 3 runs.
Figure 6: Softmax Cross-Entropy (CE) vs. pairwise distribution loss (PA) based PGD attack. Averagedover 3 runs.
Figure 7: Effect of the gradient-non-zero (GNZ) requirement. Averaged over 3 runs.
Figure 8: The normal distribution is introduced in the kth layer of a 5 layer fully connected network(k ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}). Averaged over 3 runs.
Figure 9: Accuracy and adversarial robustness under PGD attack. Left: Cauchy distribution. Right:Normal distribution without propagating covariances. Top: MNIST data set. Bottom: CIFAR-10 dataset. Averaged over 3 runs.
Figure 10: Accuracy and robustness against random normal noise. Left: Cauchy distribution. Right:Normal distribution without propagating covariances. Top: MNIST data set. Bottom: CIFAR-10 dataset. Averaged over 3 runs.
