Figure 1: Comparison of L2R2 method and IMSL method. Among them, O1, O2 represent obser-vations, H1, H2 are correct answers, H3, H4 are wrong answers, S(Hi) represents the score of thei-th hypothesis correctness.
Figure 2: Comparison of the interaction between the traditional model and the IMSL model, whereS (Hi) represents the input sequence containing the i-th hypothesisof extracting the language features of an arbitrary hypothesis, its relationship to other hypothesesshould also be considered because the hypotheses are often semantically related Pearl (1986). Tothis end, we can design an information interaction layer to capture the relationship between differenthypotheses and produce more discriminative language feature vectors. On the other hand, we haveconstructed a new loss function called “joint softmax focal loss” inspired by a recent work (Lin et al.
Figure 3: The proposed IMSL model consists of a context coding layer (using a pre-trained model)and an information interaction layer (characterizing the relationship among different hypotheses).
Figure 4: An example of rearrange groups for joint softmax focal loss.
Figure 5: The accuracy of αNLI under low resource settings5	Detailed analysis via ablation studyTo more clearly show the contribution of each module, we have done corresponding comparativeexperiments on both information interaction layer and hyperparameter tuning.
Figure 6:	Score distribution using and without using the information interaction layer5.2 Parameter comparisonWhen we select the parameters of Focal Loss, several experiments were carried out on the twohyperparameters of the balancing factor and the focusing parameter. The focusing parameter γ inEq. equation 5 can automatically down-weight the contribution of easy examples during training andrapidly focus the model on hard examples; while the balancing factor 0 < a < 1 in Eq. equation 4controls the tradeoff between correct and incorrect hypotheses. Figure 7 below shows the ACCperformance of IMSL model with different focusing parameters and balance factors. In this study,{1, 2, 3} is used as the option of focusing parameter, and {0.45, 0.5, 0.55} is used as the set ofbalancing factor. It can be observed that as the most effective parameter couple is given by γ = 2,a = 0.55.
Figure 7:	The ACC results of adjusting the balance factor γ and focusing parameter a.
