Figure 1: Visualization of perturbation and discretization of an edge in a supernet. Middle: a supernetis composed of three edges {e(i)}i=ι,2,3, each consisting of three possible operations {o(i)}i=ι,2,3which are applied in parallel to the same input. Left: edge e(2) is perturbed by removing o(1) fromthe set of candidate operations assigned to this edge. Right: the same edge e(2) is discretized withoperation o⑴ by removing all other candidate operations leaving o⑴ as the only choice left.
Figure 2: (a) Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient of different operation scoring metrics with eachother at the first iteration of NAS. (b) Rank correlation coefficient of different operation scoringfunctions vs. best-acc when invoked iteratively for each edge. In iteration i, only edge i is discretizedthen all scores for all operations on the remaining edges is computed and correlated against best-acc.
Figure 3: (a) Accuracy vs. score of architectures discovered on CIFAR-10 by Zero-Cost-PT withdifferent N. (b) Accuracy distribution of discovered architectures with different N and V.
Figure A1: Visualisation of the searching tree related to a hypothetical supernetwork with 3 nodes(represented by different colors) and 2 candidate operations (represented by different numbers). Theroot node of the tree represents a full supernetwork. Each descendant node represents a non-uniquenetwork architecture obtained by discretizing an edge identified by the color of the node, with anoperations encoded by a number in the node, given an architecture represented by a parent node. A isthe set of all possible architectures, including the supernet A0 , partially-discretized networks like A1and fully-discretized networks. The set of all fully-discretized networks is additionally denoted asA|E| , and the set of all fully-discretized networks that are achievable after operation o(2) is assignedto edge e(1), given A0, is labeled as A0,e(1),o(2) . The arrow from A0 to A1 represents a possible firststep during the discretization process which closes all grayed-out configurations. While performingNAS, at each tree level we need to decide which edge to follow; this is achieved by assigning scoresto all/some of the edges that we are willing to consider in each iteration using different scoringfunctions which are the main focus of our analysis in Section 3.
Figure A2: An example showing how correlations of different proxies are computed in our analysison initial operation scoring in Section 3.2.1•	avg-acc: Same as best-acc but we average all NAS-Bench-201 architecture test accuraciesinstead of finding the maximum.
Figure A3: Spearman,s rank correlation coefficient of different operation scoring metrics with eachother at the first iteration of NAS evaluated on NAS-Bench-1Shot1 benchmark.
Figure A4: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (global-op-iter discretization order) on the DARTSsearch space using CIFAR-10.
Figure A5: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (random discretization order) on the DARTS search spaceusing CIFAR-10.
Figure A6: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (random discretization order) on the DARTS search spaceusing ImageNet.
Figure A7: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (random discretization order) on the DARTS-S1 spaceusing CIFAR-10.
Figure A8: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (random discretization order) on the DARTS-S2 spaceusing CIFAR-10.
Figure A9: Cells found by Zero-Cost-PT (random discretization order) on the DARTS-S3 spaceusing CIFAR-10.
