Figure 1: Illustration ofa group monotonic convolutionalmodel. Representations output by a certain convolutionallayer are partitioned into disjoint subsets.
Figure 2: Comparisons between data generated by standard and monotonic models. On the twopanels on the left, we compare generations from a linear combination of the latent code of 2 imageswhich only differs in the object color. On the two panels vertically stacked on the right, we startfrom the same image but change one latent dimension at a time.
Figure 3: Illustration unit spheres B and Br on the plane.
Figure 4: Illustrative example showing that uniformly distributed draws on a unit sphere in Rnconcentrate on its boundary for large n. Applying mixup populates the interior of the space.
Figure 5: Example of explanation heat-map and corresponding occlusion obtained with Grad-CAMand a ResNet-50 trained on ImageNet. The example belongs to the validation set and correspondsto the class snowmobile.
Figure 6: Examples of explanation heat-maps superimposed onto images. From left to right wehave the original image, results obtained from a ResNet-50, a monoResNet-50, and a monoResNet-50 where the CAM operator only access the slice corresponding to the underlying class. All areobtained with Grad-CAM.
Figure 7: Examples of occluded data using explanation heat-maps. From left to right we have theoriginal image, results obtained from a ResNet-50, a monoResNet-50, and a monoResNet-50 wherethe CAM operator only access the slice corresponding to the underlying class. All are obtained withGrad-CAM.
Figure 8: HUE circle of RGB images. Original image from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hue.
Figure 9: Data generated by standard model for traversals of z on the dimension corresponding tofloor color20Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022əbəəəbsrrrrrrrHBBHHBb(a) Data for increasing values for the latentdimension associated to floor color.
Figure 10:	Data generated by monotonic model for traversals of z on the dimension correspondingto floor color21Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022I Examples of data generated with standard and monotonicMODELS(a) Input pair.
Figure 11:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: floor color.
Figure 12:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: wall color.
Figure 13:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: object color.
Figure 14:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: scale.
Figure 15:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: shape.
Figure 16:	Generating data by moving along the line passing over latent representation for inputsfor which a single factor is different. Generative factor changing: orientation.
