Figure 1: Illustration of robustness and domain transferability in different conditions.
Figure 2: The left figure illustrates the example in the function space F given a regularization parameter c.
Figure 3:	Relationship between robustness and transferability under different norms of last layer,via training with last-layer regularization (LLR) and last-layer orthogonalization (LLOT).
Figure 4:	Relationship between robustness and transferability when we regularize the featuretractor with Jacobian Regularization (JR) and weight decay (WD).
Figure 5:	Relationship between robustness and transferability when we use Gaussian noise (Gauss)and posterize (Pos) as data augmentations.
Figure 6:	Relationship between robustness and transferability on ImageNet when we use rescale andblur as data augmentations.
Figure 7:	Robustness and absolute transferability when we control the norm of last layer with last-layer regularization (LLR) and last-layer orthogonal training (LLOT) with different parameters.
Figure 8:	Robustness and absolute transferability when we regularize the feature extractor withJacobian Regularization (JR) and weight decay (WD) with different parameters.
Figure 9:	Robustness and absolute transferability when we use Gaussian noise (Gauss) and posterize(Pos) as data augmentations with different parameters.
Figure 10:	Robustness and absolute transferability when we use rescale and blur as data augmenta-tions with different parameters.
Figure 11:	Robustness and transferability for the other model structure when we control the normof last layer with last-layer regularization (LLR) and last-layer orthogonal training (LLOT) withdifferent parameters.
Figure 12:	Robustness and transferability for the other model structure when we regularize the fea-ture extractor with Jacobian Regularization (JR) and weight decay (WD) with different parameters.
Figure 13:	Robustness and transferability for the other model structure when we use Gaussian noise(Gauss) and posterize (Pos) as data augmentations with different parameters.
Figure 14:	Relationship between robustness and transferability when we use rotation and translationas data augmentations.
Figure 15: Relationship between robustness and transferability on CIFAR-10 when we use AutoAt-tack to evaluate model robustness.
