Figure 1: A schematic of the TP attack. PC is the original set of positive examples of concept C , NCis the set of negative examples of concept C, UC are the unrelated examples that are used to calculateμτ, and PC is the set of positive examples after the attack. Note that positive examples get pulledtoward unrelated concept example centroid μτ, changing the direction of VC.
Figure 2: Adversarial attacks on the ‘scaly’ concept set for four snake classes in ImageNet-1k, aswell as the ‘honeycombed’ concept set for the honeycomb class. Each curve represents a TP attacktargeting a different layer of InceptionV1. We use the same set of perturbations across each snakeclass. The x-axis records different layers of the InceptionV1 network, restricted to layers where thesnake class is sensitive to the un-modified scaly concepts, according to the TCAV sign score.They-axis is the TCAV magnitude score when TCAV is applied to that layer.
Figure 3: A feature visualization without any concept prior (first row), faceted feature visualizationon the same neuron for ‘stripes’, ‘dots’, ‘zig-zags’ (second row), and the faceted feature visualizationafter it has been attacked (third row) of channel 9 on InceptionV1 layer mixed4d. While visualizationsin the second row reflect the concept prior, the visualizations in the third row do not (indicating theattack was successful). An example token perturbation for this attack is found in Figure 7.
Figure 4: FreChet Inception Distance scores for feature visualizations on the layers mixed3a, mixed3b,mixed4a, and mixed4b. Five different feature visualizations are performed: channel feature visu-alization (FV), two separate runs of Faceted Feature Visualization with different sets of positiveand negative concept images (FFV 1 and FFV2), with Gaussian noise added to the positive conceptimages (Gaussian), and with the token pushing attack (TP attack).
Figure 5: TCAV sensitivity scores for the zebra class with the stripe images for a ResNet-18 (left)(He et al., 2016) and MobileNetV2 (right) (Sandler et al., 2018) trained on ImageNet-1K. The attacksuses perturbations made on the stripe concept images for InceptionV1 using centroids for differenthidden layers. All layers/blocks shown are sensitive to the stripe concept before the attack, and arenot sensitive after the attack.
Figure 6: Relative TCAV magnitude scores before (top) and after (bottom) the PGD logit attack onthe striped concept images for the striped, zig-zagged, and dotted concept sets.
Figure 7: Example of stripe concept images before (left) and after (right) a TP attack. We use= 4/255 and 20 iterations for all PGD experiments. The perturbation shown targets InceptionV1layer mixed3a.
Figure 8: Empirical Deepdream Mordvintsev et al. (2015) with the Concept Activation Vectors(CAVs) computed with 1) the normal concept sets in the ‘Concept Activation Vector’ rows and 2) theperturbed concept sets in the ‘Attacked Concept Activation Vector’ rows. For the attacked conceptsets, we use the PGD attack performed on the hidden layer mixed4d.
