Figure 1: Overview of our idea for directional latent mapping network. By enforcing the changedirection of semantic feature to align with desired direction in CLIP-Space, our method can achieveimpressive disentangled image manipulation.
Figure 2: The architecture of our directional latent mapping network. Given the text prompt, wemanipulate the latent code inverted by the facial images. Then We use g group channel-wise mappingnetworks to manipulate the different parts of latent code W respectively. Multiple loss functions areused to constrain the synthetic image to fulfil the requirements.
Figure 3: The illustration of attribute transfer loss LAT in our Semantic Directional DecompositionNetwork (SDD-Net). We embed both the text prompt and reference、target face into CLIP-Space.
Figure 4: Qualitative results for facial attribute editing on attribute “smile”. The left column are thetarget images sampled from CelebA-HQ dataset. The other column from left to right are the editingresults of L2M-gAn (Yang et al., 2021a), StyleCLIP* (Patashnik et al., 2021), and our directionallatent mapping network.
Figure 5: The qualitative results of our SDD-Net on single attribute transfer. Reference images in theleft column. Target images in the first row of each parts, the rest is our manipulated images. Giventhe text prompt, our SDD-Net transfer the specific attribute ("smile")to the target images (top part)when the reference have the specific attribute. By contrast, the reverse attribute ("unsmiling") willbe transferred (bottom part) when the specific attribute is not contained in the reference. Notice that,We only input one text prompt. So the SDD-Net could determine the forward or reverse transferringdirection, according to the reference.
Figure 6: Experiments on reference-guided image synthesis on CelebA-HQ. Reference and targetimages both in the first row. The second and third raw are the synthetic results of StarGANv2 (Choiet al., 2020) and our SDD-Net respectively.
Figure 7: The ablation study of identity loss. Under each column we specify (人山)identity loss.
