Figure 1: Details of our spatial attention module4.2	Channel Attention ModuleThe channel attention module is used for extracting high level multi-scale semantic information. Thechannel attention (CA) module used in our network is defined below:fCA(x) = fsigmoid(W2(fReLU(W1fA1vgPool(x))))	(20)where W1 and W2 denotes the first and second 1 × 1 convolution layer, x denotes the input data.
Figure 2: Details of our channel attention module4.3	Network ArchitectureWe use deep convolutional neural network in this work. The input is the spatial and temporal co-ordinates of the points in the fluid flow domain. This information is propagated to three Residualblocks sequentially. In between the blocks, channel attention module is used to weight the usefulnessof important features and spatial attention module is used for modelling the inter-spatial relationshipof features. Fusion operator is used to merge the individual features. The output is the spatio-temporalpressure and velocity fields predicted. The complete network architecture used in this work is shownin Figure 3:Figure 3: Illustration of our network architecture. A residual block denotes convolution, max pooling,relu activation function and batch normalization layer sequentially; CA and SA denotes channel andspatial attention module respectively; x denotes fusion operator.
Figure 3: Illustration of our network architecture. A residual block denotes convolution, max pooling,relu activation function and batch normalization layer sequentially; CA and SA denotes channel andspatial attention module respectively; x denotes fusion operator.
Figure 4:Figure 4: A solution of the Burger’s equation (left panel) is compared to the corresponding solutionof the learned partial differential equation (right panel).
Figure 4: A solution of the Burger’s equation (left panel) is compared to the corresponding solutionof the learned partial differential equation (right panel).
Figure 5: A solution of the NavierStokes equation (left panel) is compared to the correspondingsolution of the learned partial differential equation (right panel).
Figure 6: The first row shows the images of the true dynamics. The last two rows show the images ofthe predicted dynamics using our network.
