Figure 1: (a) A motivating environment. Effective patterns are patterns that can get positive re-wards. The optimal pattern here is to achieve target A coordinately, while achieving other targetsleads to sub-optimal patterns. (b) The count of different collaboration patterns learned by differentalgorithms, evaluated over 10k (1k X 10 seeds) episodes. (c) The training curves of episodic averagerewards over 10 seeds with 95% confidence regions for different algorithms.
Figure 2: The left represents maximizing MI onall patterns and the right represents maximizingMI with superior patterns and minimizing MI withinferior patterns.
Figure 3: An overall illustration of PMIC framework, consisting of two main components. DualProgressive Collaboration Buffer (DPCB) maintains superior and inferior trajectories separately ina progressive manner. Dual Mutual Information Estimator (DMIE) includes two neural estimatorsof the collaboration criterion (Equation 1) based on separate samples in DPCB.
Figure 4: Architecture of MINE for lower-bound estimation of IMINE(s; U 〜 ∏(∙∣s)).
Figure 5: Architecture of CLUB upper-bound estimation of ICLUB(s; U 〜 ∏(∙∣s)).
Figure 6: Comparisons of averaged return on MPE.
Figure 7: Comparisons of averaged return on Multi-Agent MuJoCo.
Figure 8: Comparisons of averaged test win rate on SMAC.
Figure 9: Ablation study and effect about maximizing and minimizing I(s; π(u∣s)).
Figure 10: Ablation experiments on DPCB.
Figure 11: Multi-Agent Particle Environment.
Figure 12: The structure of Multi-Agent MuJoCo.
Figure 13: Influence of DPCB size.
Figure 14: Comparison of maximizing mutual information with different forms. PMIC-versionleverages MI of global state and joint action. VM3-version leverages the MI of any two agents’policies among agents. SIC-version leverages the MI of z and the joint policy.
Figure 15: Ablation experiment of α and β .
Figure 16: Comparison of PMIC with MINE and PMIC with normal estimator.
Figure 17: Visualization results of the MI estimated by different MINE for different positive buffer.
Figure 18: Comparison of more tasks on Multi-Agent MuJoCo.
Figure 19: Comparison of MASAC-based methods on Multi-Agent MuJoCo.
Figure 20: Comparison between leveraging PMIC and GASIL.
Figure 21: Ablation experiments of βH and double Q on Wildlife Rescue.
