Figure 1: An illustration of the natural evolution: The evolution takes place in the outer loop, wherethe genomes are mutated and selected, and the population either thrive or become extinct based on theFitness. Lifetime of each individual composes the inner loop. At the beginning, the genomes decidethe learning mechanisms and initial neural configurations of the brain in the new born life. As theneural networks interact with the environment through actions and observations, its connections andhidden neuron states are further updated to better adapt to the environment. Plasticity are believedto be important part of the learning mechanisms. The fitness depends on the learning and adaptingcapability of each individual.
Figure 2: A sketch of the information flow in plastic recurrent neural networks (PRNN). The redconnections are plastic, the black connections are static.
Figure 3: Demonstration of the tasks.(a) Two tasks sampled from Sequence Predicting(l=1,K=25,N=25), the red lines are training sets and the green lines are testing sets. (b) One tasksampled from Sequence Predicting (l=3,K=25,N=25). (c) A trajectory generated by an agent in aWheeled Robot Navigating task.
Figure 4: Plotting meta-testing scores against meta-training iterations.
Figure 5: t-SNE visualization of the transformation of the connection weights (Wt) and hidden states(ht) in the inner loop. (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f) are from Sequence Predicting (l=1,K=25,N=50) task, (g)(h)are from Wheeled Robot Navigating (Low Noise) task.
Figure 6: A sketch of the model architectures for evaluated tasksFor Sequence Predicting tasks, the input observation and the output action has the dimension of l.
Figure 7: A sketch of the parallel training framework.
Figure 8: Supplementary t-SNE visualization of the transformation of the connection weights (Wt)and hidden states (ht) in the inner loop. (a)(b)(c) are from Sequence Predicting (l=1,K=25,N=50)task, (d)(e) are from Wheeled Robot Navigating (Low Noise) task.
Figure 9: Trajectories of the agents from Wheeled Robot Navigating task with the task configurationof (A = 0.5, k = 0.2, (gx, gy) = (-0.3, -0.3)). We show the trajectories of the wheeled robot inblack and red lines and the goal in green circles.
