Figure 1: The overall architecture of GUided-TTS. The unconditional DDPM learns to generatespeech Xo without the transcript. The other modules, the phoneme classifier, duration predictor, andspeaker encoder are for guiding the unconditional DDPM to generate conditional samples given y.
Figure 2: CER according to gradient scales, (a) CER of Guided-TTS with the classifier guidance(scaled version of Song et al. (2021b)), (b) CER of Guided-TTS with the norm-based guidance(b) Norm-based classifier guidanceFig. 2 presents the CER of the Guided-TTS with the classifier guidance in the previous works and theproposed norm-based guidance. As shown in Fig. 2a, the sample generated by the existing guidancemethod shows a far worse CER than the existing TTS models, which indicates that it is not suitablefor TTS. On the other hand, Fig. 2b shows that the proposed guidance method with the appropriategradient scale helps generate samples given text sentences accurately like the existing TTS models.
Figure 3: Mel-spectrogram inpainting results of unconditional DDPM trained on LJSPeech, and twospeakers (Speaker ID: 92, 60§7) from Hi-Fi TTS.
Figure 4: The norm of the unconditional score and the classifier gradient for each timestep(b) The gradient norm of the classifierThe norm of the unconditional score and the gradient norm of the classifier for each timestep areshown in Fig. 4. We sample Xt at a total of 1000 timesteps (t ∈ (20^, 2^,…，∙∣990)) using theEq. (3) for all 500 samples from the test set of the LJSpeech. We then obtain the norm of theunconditional score and the gradient of the classifier using the sampled Xt with the modules ofGuided-TTS-T. Each norm is averaged over 500 samples for each timestep. As shown in Fig. 4a,the norm of the unconditional score rises steeply around t = 0. This is about 70 times larger thanthe norm of the classifier gradient near t = 0 (Fig. 4b), which significantly reduces the effect ofthe classifier guidance. To alleviate this problem, we propose the norm-based guidance in Section3.2.1, which helps prevent both the gradient of the classifier from being ignored and the issue ofsynthesized speech not matching the text.
