Figure 1: Image samples of Col-ored MNIST task with additionalpatch feature.
Figure 2: Visualization of various test accuracy on Colored MNIST with varying noise probabilityfor shape pc and for color and patch pe . Our BLOOD shows robustness performance against thechange of pe , while PI highly depends on the spurious correlations.
Figure 3: The Pearson correlation coefficients between model’s predictions and bias features on theColored MNIST task with (a) a single spurious feature Color and (b) two types of spurious features,Color and Patch. The prediction results of BLOOD show high correlations with the shape of digitsfor both (a) and (b) cases, while PI fails to de-bias when there are two types of spurious correlationsin the data.
Figure 4: Visualization of created groups with Pearson correlation coefficient between the label andbias features on Colored MNIST task. Our BLOOD dynamically re-groups the training data at eachlearning step while PI constructs single static groups.
Figure 5: Data examples of Camelyon17-wilds and FMoW-wilds.
Figure 6: Visualization of the number of incorrectly predicted samples by shallow models fφ1 andfφ2 on the Colored MNIST. The stacked bar chart (a) and (b) indicates the misclassified examplesof environment e2 predicted by fφ1 , and (c) and (d) indicates incorrect prediction of fφ2 on environ-ment e1.
Figure 7: Visualization of (a) Pearson correlation coefficient between spurious features and mod-els prediction, (b) confidence scores of the shallow model’s wrong predictions, and (c) dominantspurious attributes for re-grouping. Confidence is measured as the average of the top 20% softmaxprobabilities values. In (c), darker green indicates strong negative Pearson correlations betweenattributes and target labels, representing the more dominant features in the crafted groups.
Figure 8: Pearson correlation coefficients between the target labels and attribute values of createdmisclassified groups, (a) regrouping the environment Male by shallow model trained on Female,GF emale→M ale and(b) GMale→Female.
Figure 9: Confidence scores of the shallow model’s wrong predictions on disjoint environment.
