Figure 1: The KF algorithm. The prediction step is based onthe motion model Ft with noise Q, whereas the update step isbased on the observation model Ht with noise R.
Figure 2: (a) Benchmarks names (rows) and the properties that define them (columns). Green means that thebenchmark satisfies the property. (b,c) Targets in Toy and Free Motion benchmarks (projected onto XY plane).
Figure 3: Prediction errors of KF and OKF on1208 targets of the test data of MOT20 videosdataset. The MSE of OKF is smaller by 18%,with statistical significance of p-value < 10-6over the test samples.
Figure 4: The covariance matrix R of the observationnoise obtained in a (Cartesian) KF by noise estimationand by optimization, based on the dataset of the Toybenchmark. The axes correspond to the observation vari-ables associated with the matrix entries. Note that thenoise estimation is quite accurate, as the true varianceof the noise is 1002 for the positional dimensions and52 for Doppler. The optimization increases the vari-ance associated with the Doppler signal, as predicted byLemma E.1. The decrease in the other diagonal compo-nents is discussed in Appendix E.
Figure 5: (a) Relative tracking errors (loweris better) with relation to a standard KF, overtargets with different ranges of acceleration.
Figure 6: A sample of targets trajectories.
Figure 7: The Neural Kalman Filter (NKF) algorithm of Section 5. The differences from Figure 1 are marked.
Figure 8: The observation noise (R) and prediction noise (Q) matrices obtained by noise estimation (KF) andby optimization (OKF), for the problem of state-estimation from lidar measurements (described in Appendix J).
Figure 9: Generalization tests: optimization vs. noise estimation under distributional shifts.
Figure 10: The advantage of OKF over KF remains positive - although sometimes smaller - even when thetrain data reduces to as few as 20 targets. The shadowed areas correspond to 95% confidence-intervals.
Figure 11: A sample of 2 targets in the first frame of the test Video in MOT20. The true trajectories of thetargets are shown along with the predictions of KF and OKF (each prediction is done one time-step in adVance).
Figure 12: (a) A sample of 6 targets trajectories from the simulated self-driving data. (b) Prediction errors ofKF and OKF on 600 targets of the test data. OKF is clearly more accurate, as also indicated by the huge z-valuecorresponding to the errors difference (calculated as Z = mean(∆err)/std(∆err) ∙ VN). (C) the tracking ofKF and OKF on a sample target trajectory, focused on the time interval 14 < t < 32 for visual clarity.
Figure 13: The relative MSE and NLL results of various models in comparison to the standard KF model. Thetextual labels specify the absolute MSE and NLL. Note that certain bars of NLL are of entirely different scaleand thus are cropped in the figure (their values can be seen in the labels). In each benchmark, the models weretrained with relation to MSE loss, on train data of the middle acceleration-range: the two other accelerationranges in each benchmark correspond to generalization over distributional shifts.
Figure 14: (a) Errors of different tracking models over different benchmarks. This is a different visualizationof the results of Table 1. The error-bars correspond to confidence intervals of 95%. Note that the optimizedmodels (the last four) tend to yield better and more stable results than the estimated models (the first four). (b)The RMSE ratio between the estimated models and the optimized ones, over all the benchmarks and designsdiscussed in Section 4. Note that all the ratios are above 1, i.e., all the models in all the benchmarks had smallererrors when tuned by optimization. The horizontal line represents the average ratio.
Figure 15: The observation noise (R) and prediction noise (Q) matrices obtained in a (Cartesian) KF by noiseestimation and by optimization with relation to MSE, based on the dataset of the Free-motion benchmark.
Figure 16: Samples of targets trajectories in the various benchmarks described in Section 4, projected onto thehorizontal plane. This is an extension of Figures 2b,2c for the rest of the benchmarks.
Figure 17: Descriptive statistics of the various benchmarks of Section 4: duration of targets trajectories;distance from the radar; targets speed; targets acceleration; motion direction (90 degrees correspond to horizontalmotion); and observation errors vs. distance from radar.
