Figure 1: On MNIST, the rotation is easy to compute, allowing for the use of equivariant models. Therotation is difficult to compute for the car, making it harder to apply equivariant methods (Carvana,2017).
Figure 2: Diagram of the model architecture of our G-equivariant world model. The features in redhave an explicit G-action ρ. The networks in red are G-equivariant. The example Reacher input hasG = D4 symmetry. The MDP actions have G-representation type ρflip meaning they are reversed insign by reflections and unaltered by rotations. The Symmetric Embedding Network is a CNN and theEncoder and Transition model are E(2)-CNNs with fiber group D4.
Figure 3: SO(3)-equivariance of the transition function for SO(3) object manipulation.
Figure 4: Learned symmetric embeddings for Reacher: pixel observation s (left top) and nextobservation s0 (left bottom), latent representation z of the evaluation set (right). The representationtype of z is ρD4 ,reg which we factor into irreducible representations before visualizing (see Hall(2003)). All encoded samples in the evaluation set are shown and the encoded current observation iscolored red and the encoded next observation is colored orange. There is a clear circular pattern thatmatch joint rotations.
Figure 5: Latent space traversal for matrix multiplication (Matmul) transition model in Teapot. Toprow: Ground truth rotation of a teapot. Bottom row: Projection in the latent space of the Matmulmodel, which is regularized to consist only of valid rotation matrices. The model, by construction,does not have a fixed reference frame; hence, the two sequences are offset by the learned latentreference frame.
Figure 6: 2D Shapes: learned embeddings for all states in the evaluation set when trained on only theup action. Our model (left) is able to generalize well and learns the correct underlying 5 × 5 grid.
Figure 7: Original observations and their G-transformed versions16Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Gram-Schmidt embedding for Teapot transition model In the case of the teapot domain, thetransition model is constrained to output an element of SO(3) representing a positively-orientedorthonormal frame. This is achieved by having the network output two vector u, v ∈ R3 and thenperforming Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization. Only two vectors are necessary since orthogonalityand orientation determine the third, after producing two orthonormal vectors u0 , v0 , the third vectorw0 is uniquely determined by the property that it completes a positively-oriented orthonormal frameand can be computed by cross product. In summary,0 /H II	0 V - (UJ v)u0U = u/kuk,	V = kv -(U∙ V)u'k，w0 = u0 × v0,	y = [u0 v0 w0].
