Figure 1: Density map visualizations on the toy federateddatasets of WGAN, ProbGAN and EP-GAN at different feder-ated turns. WGAN and ProbGAN suffer from mode collapseafter FedAvg in the federated setting, while EP-GAN suc-cessfully recovers all four modes (last column). D-MSE score(defined in Appendix F.2) indicates the similarity between thedensity maps of GANs and the ground-truth GMM. The lowerD-MSE is better.
Figure 2: The generated non-i.i.d four Gaus-sian Dataset.
Figure 3: Images generated by ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the WGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators. ProbGAN withWGAN objective fails to converge under the extremely non-i.i.d setting (right).
Figure 4: Images generated by EP-BGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the WGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 5: Images generated by EP-ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the WGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 6: Images generated by MixtUre-EP-ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the WGANobjective under different settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 7: Images generated by ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the LSGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators. We can observecollapsed generators under the extremely non-i.i.d setting (right).
Figure 8: Images generated by EP-BGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the LSGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 9: Images generated by EP-ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 With the LSGAN objective underdifferent settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 10: Images generated by MixtUre-EP-ProbGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with the LSGANobjective under different settings. Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 11: The model architectures of SRU (left) and SRU (EP) Wl EP-ProbGAN (right). Theoverlapped modules represent the Bayesian neural network samples. SRU w/ ProbGAN and SRU w/EP-ProbGAN share similar architecture with SRU (EP) w/ EP-ProbGAN.
