Figure 1: Conceptual overview of our approach. We first estimate the data manifold of an existingdataset with a variational autoencoder, then use the decoder as a generative model. On the generateddata, we train a classifier f . For this classifier, we evaluate whether different gradient based expla-nations Ei align with the tangent space of the data manifold. Moving along an explanation alignedwith the tangent space keeps us in the manifold, whereas moving along an orthogonal explanationtakes us out of manifold. Our hypothesis is that the latter does not lead to meaningful explanationsbecause it describes changes that lead to unnatural images.
Figure 2: (First row) depicts images from the test set of MNIST32. (Second row) depicts the part ofthe gradient that lies in tangent space for these images. (Third row) depicts the part of gradient thatis orthogonal to the tangent space for these images. Blue corresponds to negative attribution, redto positive attribution. (Bottom row) depicts the fraction of four different explanation methods intangent space. (Bottom left) MNIST32. (Bottom center) MNIST256. (Bottom right) EMNIST128.
Figure 3: Comparing different explanation methods on (Top row) CIFAR10, (Middle row) X-RayPneumonia and (Bottom row) Diabetic Retinopathy detection. (Left part) qualitatively shows differ-ent explanations. (Right part) shows the distribution of the fraction in tangent space for all methodsover the images from the test set. In high dimensional cases SmoothGrad has the highest component,whereas Input × Gradient has the highest component on CIFAR10.
Figure 4: Fraction of gradient in tangent space evolving over the course of training. Mean and 90%confidence bounds. Gray line shows the expected fraction of a random vector in tangent space.
Figure 5: Adv. Robust Gradients.
Figure 6: M3 and Simulation Results.
Figure 7: Random samples from the generated datasets. Left: MNIST32. Right: MNIST256.
Figure 8: Images from the test set of the synthetic MNIST256 task. The second row depicts thepart of the gradient that lies in tangent space. The third row depicts the part of the gradient that isorthogonal to the tangent space. Blue corresponds to negative attribution, red to positive attribution.
