Figure 1: Comparison of Informer and Yformer architecture. (1) The Informer architecture processpart of the past input data (x, y) within the decoder as (xtoken, ytoken) along with the future predictors(x0). The Yformer avoids this redundant reprocessing and uses a masked self-attention network forembedding the future predictors (x0). (2) The Informer uses the final encoder embedding as the inputto the decoder. The Yformer passes a concatenated ( ++ ) representation (ei) of the ith Y-Past andY-Future Encoder embedding to the I - ith layer of the Y-Decoder, forming a U-Net connection(represented in red) between the encoder and the decoder. (3) The Yformer architecture predictsboth the input reconstruction ypast and future predictions yfut, to encourage learning embeddings thatcan produce similar output distribution as the inputs.
Figure 2: Impact of the Yformer architecture and re-construction loss on univariate (top) and multivariate(bottom) for ETTh2 (left) and ETTm1 (right) datasets.
Figure 3: General time series setting illustrating the quadruples (x, y, x0, y0) denoting the past pre-dictors, past targets, future predictors and future targets respectively. Given the history information(x, y) and the future predictors (x0) (in green) until time t = T , time series forecasting predicts thetarget y0 (in red) for the next τ time steps. In the figure, O and M represents the respective channelsof the targets and the predictors.
Figure 4: U-Net connections for effectively utilizing embeddings at multiple resolutions in theYformer. The Y-Past Encoder embeddings and the Y-Future Encoder embeddings are concatenatedwithin the Yformer encoder. A direct connection is allowed between the contracting encoder embed-ding (ei) and the corresponding expanding decoder embedding (dI-i). (++ denotes concatenation)B Appendix : Additional Related WorksTime-series Forecasting: Time Series forecasting has been a well-established research topic withsteadily growing applications in a real-world environment. Traditionally, ARIMA Box & Jenkins(1968) and exponential smoothing methods Hyndman & Athanasopoulos (2018) have been used fortime series forecasting. However, limited scalability and the inability to model non-linear patternsrestrict their use for time series forecasting.
