Figure 1: The BYOL network architecture. It has an online stream and a target stream. The onlinestream has a representation-projection-prediction pipeline while the target stream lacks the predic-tion part. The target branch is updated by exponential moving average of the online branch. Themodel is trained by encouraging the output of two streams from a positive pair of views to get close.
Figure 2: Illustration of group disentanglement. The lower vector denotes four ground truth factorsand the upper vector is the group disentangled feature vector. Each ground truth factor may corre-spond to multiple feature dimensions, but each feature dimension only correspond to one factor.
Figure 3: The mutual information heatmap between factors and latent code dimensions. It explainsthe pattern of “group disentanglement” that a factor shares high mutual information with multipledimensions of representation instead of only one dimension described by the perfectly compactdisentanglement. On the other hand, a certain representation dimension will not have high mutualinformation with more than one factor.
Figure 4: The visualization of normal-ized co-occurrence of mutual informa-tion on dSprites.
Figure 5: Representation variation when manipulating one factor only in the dimension-reducedversion. In (a) and (b), position/ and PositionD are manipulated respectively and only cause onedimension severely variate. While when manipulating the ill-defined factor orientation, two dimen-sions variate. The result shows a more compact disentanglement after reduction of dimension forthose well-defined independent factors.
Figure 6: The visualization of co-occurrence of mutual information of the factors of SmallNORB.
Figure 7: Samples from SmallNORB dataset. The variance is controlled by the factor indicated onaxis. The image is from Jakab et al. (2018).
Figure 8: The visualization of co-occurrence of mutual information of the factors of Cars3D.
Figure 9: Some samples from the Cars3D dataset. The factor of azimuth is the same for all samples.
Figure 10: The visualization of co-occurrence of mutual information of the factors of Shapes3D.
