Figure 1: (Left) original X and (Right) augmented y = Φ(X) calcium traces, where the bottom leftcorner (yellow dashed triangle) in y has been masked out and noise being added to the segment.
Figure 2: Forward and backward cycle steps of neuron 75 from a randomly selected test segment.
Figure 3: (Left) Learned attention masks AG1 and AG2 in AGResNet G given a random testsegment X 〜X. AG1 and AG2 both learned to ignore information in (to-be) masked region in x.
Figure 4: Forward and backward cycle steps of neuron 50 from a randomly selected test segment.
Figure 5: (Left) AG sigmoid masks in AGResNet G given a random test segment X 〜X. Thehistograms on the right show the neuron-level attention. Note that AG1 and AG2 are at 4 and 2times lower dimension than the input. (Right) GradCAM localization map of DY given a randomlyselect test segment y 〜Y. The top panel shows the original input, where yellow and orange dottedlines mark the start and end of each reward zones. The second panel shows the localization mapsuperimposed on the input. Neurons were ordered based on AE reconstruction loss. The exactordering is available in Table E.1. Plots of F and DX are shown in Figure G.38Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 6: Positional attention maps of (Top Left) DX , (Top Right) DY , (Bottom Left) G and (Bot-tom Right) F w.r.t virtual position in the animal experiment. Yellow and orange dotted lines indicatethe start and end of the reward zone. Neurons were ordered based on AE reconstruction loss. Theexact ordering is available in Table E.1. The pre- and post-learning activities of top 10 highlightedneurons learned by DX and DY are available in Figure G.5 and Figure G.6b, respectively.
Figure 6: Positional attention maps of (Top Left) DX , (Top Right) DY , (Bottom Left) G and (Bot-tom Right) F w.r.t virtual position in the animal experiment. Yellow and orange dotted lines indicatethe start and end of the reward zone. Neurons were ordered based on AE reconstruction loss. Theexact ordering is available in Table E.1. The pre- and post-learning activities of top 10 highlightedneurons learned by DX and DY are available in Figure G.5 and Figure G.6b, respectively.
