Figure 1: Triangularized boundary surfaces of the hopper (left) and the rotating drum (right). Theaccurate description of rather simple, curved geometries requires a relatively large number of trianglesof different shapes and sizes.
Figure 2: Dynamic modification of the graph edges (red lines) and nodes (red points).Left: Calculationof the distance cl(v2,论)between a real particle at node v2 and the triangle corresponding to virtualparticle node i⅛. Right: Insertion of an additional edge between i⅛ and v2 and representation ofthe nodes in terms of the corresponding node features Pw, XW and P%., X^j for real and virtual nodefeatures, respectively.
Figure 3: Visualization of point - triangle distance calculations in 3D. The triangle is representedby a parameterized function t (u, v) = b + u e0 + v e1 with u ≥ 0, v ≥ 0, u + v 6 1 (indicated bythe orange area). Level sets of q (u, v) are indicated by ellipses and describe the squared Euclideandistance ofa triangle point t (u, v) to the point p, for which we compute the minimum distance.
Figure 4: Hopper dynamics. Left: Distributions for cohesive and non-cohesive particles. Simulationdata and BGNN predictions are compared. Particles are indicated by green spheres, triangular wallareas are yellow, the edges of these triangles are indicated by grey lines. In contrast to liquid-likenon-cohesive particles, cohesive particles lead to congestion of the hopper. Right: Position (upperright) and flow profile (lower right) for non-cohesive particles. Corresponding plots for cohesiveparticles can be found in App. C. Simulation data (solid lines) and BGNN predictions (dashed lines)are compared. Simulation uncertainties are due to a change of the particle numbers (±25%) and todifferent initial conditions. To support the reviewing process, we provide simulation predictions for ahopper with more timesteps in animations at https://bgnn3dsim.bitbucket.io/.
Figure 5: Rotating drum dynamics. Left: Particle distributions for cohesive and non-cohesiveparticles. Simulation data and BGNN predictions are compared. Particles are indicated by greenspheres, triangular wall areas are yellow, the edges of these triangles are indicated by grey lines. Thecircular arrow indicates the rotation direction of the drum. In contrast to liquid-like non-cohesiveparticles, cohesive particles stick together much stronger. Right: position (upper right) and entropyplot (lower right) for non-cohesive particles. The entropy is shown for particle class assignmentaccording to the x (blue) and z (red) position. Corresponding plots for cohesive particles can befound in App. C. Simulation data (solid lines) and BGNN predictions (dashed lines) are compared.
Figure 6: OOD generalization behavior for the hop-per (left) and the rotating drum (right). In contrastto the training and validation data the outlet size ofthe hopper was decreased, the inclination angles ofthe hopper side walls are enlarged, and, the lengthof the rotating drum is increased.
