Figure 1: Schematic representations outlining the difference between GroupBERT and BERT struc-tures. A single GroupBERT layer has double the number of modules.
Figure 2: Schematic diagram showing the comparison of FFN implementations of different trans-former variants that rely on grouped matrix multiplications.
Figure 3: Attention maps of a single head from the first MHA module of BERT Base (a) andBase + Conv (b) (Section 3.5), averaged over 103 validation sequences to show the sequential localitypreference of a typical attention head (see Appendix C for all heads). Each row corresponds to a querytoken position, each column to a key position. Adding the convolution module encourages attentionlayers to learn long-range content-based interactions over short-range position-based interactions.
Figure 4: The GroupBERT model architecture is Pareto efficient on pre-training masked languagemodeling task. As well as comparing against the original BERT baseline, we tested transformers thatuse grouped transformations like SqueezeBERT and the uniform version of DeLight. For all modelswe tuned the learning rate to maximize their task performance. (a) Mean MLM validation loss ±standard deviation plotted against the total pre-training FLOPs. (b) Mean MLM validation loss ±standard deviation plotted against the total time for pre-training.
Figure 5: Median SQuAD F1 and Exact Match scores ± standard deviation of the GroupBERT andBERT model families plotted against the total pre-training FLOPs (a,c) and against the total time topre-train (b,d).
Figure 6: Ablation results showing the contribution of individual model modifications. Points wherewe changed the method of training have the same number of FLOPs as the original BERT Base model.
Figure 7: BERT Base attention maps, for all layers L0-L11. Heads h0-h11 in each layer are orderedby positional entropy, Equation 3. Drawn with a value range of [0, 0.1] and gamma of 1/3.
Figure 8: BERT Base + Conv attention maps, generated and drawn as per Figure 7.
Figure 9: GroupBERT Base attention maps, generated and drawn as per Figure 7.
