Figure 1: Latent space stratification by prediction tasks in Delirium and OR datasets. In classifi-cation prediction (Fig 1.a), cases with positive postoperative delirium are shown in red and caseswith negative postoperative delirium are shown in blue. In regression (Fig 1.b), cases are dividedinto lower quartile (cyan), inter-quartile (green) and upper quartile (blue) of predicted/actual surgeryduration. Vertical lines represent the center of mass for each group.
Figure 2: Latent space separating patients by phenotypes. Circles represent the cluster of a particulargroup with radius equal to the average distance between in-class samples and cluster center. a)Information in albumin level is split into two dimensions, as albumin is relevant to prediction. b& c): Latent dimension separating intra-abdominal surgeries from other types while capturing theintrinsic similarity of intra-abdominal surgeries with different free-text descriptions.
Figure A1: Graphical diagram of sVAE. Heterogeneous mixed type data are first converted to nu-merical embedding, and then fed into the encoder. Prediction task is only visible by sVAE duringthe training stage to regulate the latent space, and is not needed when encoding the testing data15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022A.3 Hyper-parameters and implementation detailsAll deep latent models, including AE, VAE, β-TCVAE,smooth-VAE, and sVAE are implementedusing Python Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019), with the same configuration for all datasets and models.
Figure A2: Latent space stratification by prediction task in multi-task training. Positive cases inmortality prediction are shown in red and negative cases in blue. For regression prediction of ICULoS, cases are divided into lower quartile (cyan), inter-quartile (green) and upper quartile (blue).
Figure A3: Latent space separating patients by phenotypes. Circles represent the cluster of a partic-ular group with radius equal to the average distance between in-class samples and cluster center.
