Figure 1: Overview of Smooth Domain Adversarial Training. Conventional approaches of smooth-ing loss do not discriminate between adversarial loss and task loss. Based on our theoretical analysiswe propose SDAT which only focuses on smoothing task loss, leading to effective generalization ontarget domain. 1•	We analyze the optimization procedure of DAT, establishing the correlation between thesmoothness near optima w.r.t. task loss and generalization on the target domain.
Figure 2: Eigen Spectral Density plots of Hessian (V2RIS(hθ)) for Adam (left), SGD (middle) andSDAT (right) on Art 今 Clipart. Each plot contains the maximum eigenvalue (λmax) and the trace ofthe Hessian (Tr(H)), which are indicators of the smoothness (Lower Tr(H) and λmax indicate thepresence of smoother loss surface). Low range of eigenvalues (x-axis), Tr(H) and λmax for SGDindicates that it reaches a smoother minima compared to Adam. SDAT reaches a smoother minimacompared to DAT with either SGD and Adam.
Figure 3: A) Error on Target Domain (y-axis) for Office-Home dataset against maximum eigenvalueλmax of classification loss in DAT. When compared to SGD, Adam converges to a non-smoothminima (high λmax), leading to a high error on target. B) Domain Accuracy (vs iterations) islower when discriminator is smooth (i.e. SDAT w/ adv), which indicates suboptimal discrepancyestimation dsΦ,t C) SNGAN performance on different datasets, smoothing discriminator in GAN alsoleads to inferior GAN performance (higher FID) across both datasets.
Figure 4: Analysis of SDAT for Ar → Cl split of Office-Home dataset. A) Variation of target ac-curacy with maximum perturbation ρ. B) Comparison of accuracy of SDAT with DAr for differentratio of label noise. C) Comparison of accuracy when smoothing is applied to various loss compo-nents.
Figure S1: Validation Accuracy across epochs on different splits of DomainNet. We run on threedifferent random seeds and plot the error bar indicating standard deviation across runs. CDAN w/SDAT consistently outperforms CDAN across different splits of DomainNet.
