Figure 1: (a) Time series segmentation; (b) slidingwindow approach; (c) our approachIn this work we address the TSS problem and propose a novel neural network approach, SegTime,that can segment time series at time step level and excel both for fast changing labels (once per tensof samples) and slow changing labels (one per thousands of samples). This makes SegTime unique,since existing methods are typically tailored towards either fast or slow change but not for both.
Figure 2: (a) Architecture of SegTime (An expanded overview is given in Appendix Figure 2);(b) Multi-Scale Skip LSTM Net (MSS-LSTM). Blue rounded rectangles indicate complex neutralnetworks, and green rounded rectangles indicate simple layers. In the skip-LSTMs, k is the skippingfactor. When k = 1, a skip-LSTM is equal to a normal LSTM.
Figure 3: The 1D-encoder-decoder structurestood as a down-sampling rate), namely by every k value the Skip-LSTM takes one value. The out-puts of the multiple skip-LSTM are upsampled and concatenated, and then go through an optionaldropout layer. Note that the numbers of skip-LSTMs of different skipping factors are independenthyper-parameters. They can be tuned to target on data of different scales. For example, if the la-bel changes are of high frequency, i.e. when the input sequence are sampled with relatively low4Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022frequency, we can use more skip-LSTMs of smaller skipping factors k. On the other hand, if thelabel changes are of low frequency, i.e. when the input sequence are sampled with relatively highfrequency, we can use more skip-LSTMs of larger skipping factors. One of important reasons forthe excellent property of SegTime to handle time series of two scales is due to the MSS-LSTM net,since it has two important functions: (1) automatic adaption of the weights to focus on the moreimportant frequency scale of input-output sequence pairs; (2) representation learning of temporaldependencies within the data.
Figure 4: The stepwise segmentation. 1D-Conv: 1D convolutional layer, l: length ofthe sequence, c: cardinality of the labels.
