Figure 1: Overview of the accelerated MRI pipeline. Acquisition happens sequentially in Fourier space, where apolicy decides on the next location to acquire. Dashed lines indicate optional relations: not all policies rely ontraining data, and not all policies are data adaptive, as shown in Table 1.
Figure 2: Illustration of the the data processing pipeline of MRI subsampling. Diamonds represent data inFourier domain (k-space) and circles represent data in image domain. The postprocessed observation and groundtruth are the data that are subsequently used for training the reconstruction and policy models. The pipelinefeatures three main blocks, namely preprocessing, subsampling and postprocessing.
Figure 3: PSNR performance plot on the test set, using the knee dataset with the processing from Pineda et al.
Figure 4:	Per Image distribution of SSIM differences between sampling methods across the sampling process.
Figure 5:	SS-DDQN variability and comparison with the LBCS mask. CoV stands for Coefficient of Variationhere.
Figure 6: Two ways to report the same result, SSIM version of fig. 3(b) SSIM vs acceleration rate19Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022E Detail on the practical recommendationsIn this appendix, we discuss the recommendations issued in the conclusion, and provide the supportingevidence from our results.
Figure 7: PSNR and SSIM of LBCS with larger batch size (LBCS - big) trained on MSE, zoomed to the regionwhere the smaller batch size LBCS underperformed. Note that it fully matches or outperforms both versions ofDDQN on PSNR.
Figure 8: Visualization of masks, observations, reconstructions and ground truths and error maps(|reconstruction - ground truth|) at 25% sampling rate, for different policies (Random, LtH, LBCS, RL).
Figure 9: Additional visualization for the image displayed in Figure 8. The results feature 12.5% sampling rate.
Figure 10: Visualization of reconstructed images at different sampling rates (6%, 12.5%, 19% and 25%) fortwo sampling policies (LBCS and RL) and two reconstruction algorithms (UNet and cResNet). The data areprocessed according to the cvb setting, i.e. cropped images, vertical undersampling and Bakker-type distributionof masks. The last row shows the ground truth (repeated), and each reconstruction has the corresponding SSIMdisplayed at the bottom right of the image. The rightmost column display the columns acquired during sampling(in white) as as a function of the acquisition steps: starting on top with only center frequencies and progressivelyadding more and more lines to the sampling mask. The top plot (a) displays a proton density, fat saturated(PDFS) image, and the bottom plot displays a proton density (PD) image (Zbontar et al., 2019).
Figure 11: Performance plots for the SS-DDQN. This was done in the cropped, vertical and Bakker-type masksetting (cvb).
Figure 12: Visual comparison between observation, reconstruction and ground truth of the SS-DDQN in thecropped, vertical, Bakker-like mask setting (cvb). The images evaluated are the same as in Figure 10.
