Figure 1: Overview of our problem setup and our proposed network architectures. Top row (A)shows the problem of 3D snapshot microscopy, where we computationally reconstruct a 3D samplefrom a 2D image. Middle row (B) shows our proposed FourierNet architecture, which includes aFourier convolution layer that enables efficient computation of global features. Bottom row (C)shows an extension of our proposed architecture, the FourierUNet, which mimics the multiscalefeature extraction of a standard UNet efficiently and with global features using a multiscale Fourierconvolution.
Figure 2: Comparing simulated camera images and reconstructions of a Type D volume capturedusing our FourierNet (middle) versus UNet (right) microscopes. Top row shows simulated 256 × 256pixel camera images; bottom right of camera image shows approximate acquisition time (given areasonable number of simulated photons per pixel, i.e. SNR).Ground truth has no correspondingcamera image, because the 3D volume is imaged directly via confocal microscopy (acquisition timein xy view). Colored arrows in left column show projection axis for each row. White arrows showindividual neurons clearly visible for FourierNet, but not for UNet.
Figure 3: Reconstructed volumes resulting from imaging Type B samples by microscopes optimizedfor Type A, B, C. Imaging Type B samples with microscope parameters optimized for Type B samplesyields the best reconstructions. Top to bottom: xy max projection, xz max projection, simulated512 × 512 camera image.
Figure 4: Comparisons of our method (second and third rows) to state-of-the-art learned reconstructionmethods on lensless diffused images of natural scenes. Regions labeled 1 indicate missing details,either resolution or textures in backgrounds. Regions labeled 2 indicate hallucinated textures.
Figure 5: Diagram of a 4f optical model that is the basis for our simulated microscope Mφ , showingthe Fourier plane in which we have the programmable and trainable 2D phase mask φ.
Figure 6: FourierNet successfully optimizes a PSF to image and reconstruct Type D where UNet fails.
Figure 7: Optimizing PSFs for different samples result in PSFs tailored to each sample. Note thatPSF optimized for Type A (left) has pencils with a span in z that matches Type A. PSF optimizedfor Type B (middle) has pencils that span the entire z depth. PSF optimized for Type C (right) haspencils spread farther apart to account for the larger sample. Top row shows simulated camera imageof a Type A, B, or C example respectively, middle row shows xy max projection of the PSF, andbottom row shows xz max projection of the PSF.
Figure 8: Slab views of a Type D example volume reconstruction, showing our methods (Fouri-erNet/FourierUNet) do the best job of reconstructing throughout the volume. Note that the UNetreconstructions are blurry across all slabs, with few exceptions. Colored boxes show which sampleplanes a particular slab comes from, corresponding to boxes in xz projection view at top. AnnotationMφ shows which network architecture was used for microscope optimization; annotation Rθ showswhich architecture was used for reconstruction.
Figure 9: Slab views of an example Type A volume show that the microscope optimized for Type Aresults in the best reconstructions. Note that the reconstruction with a microscope optimized for TypeA is almost identical to the ground truth, while the other microscopes create blurrier reconstructions.
Figure 10: Slab views of an example Type B volume show that the microscope optimized for Type Bresults in the best reconstructions; other microscopes result in blurrier reconstructions. Colored boxesshow which sample planes a particular slab comes from, corresponding to boxes in xz projectionview at top.
Figure 11: Slab views of an example Type C volume show that microscope optimized for Type Cprovides most consistent reconstruction. Colored boxes have same meaning as Figures 9, 10.
