Figure 1: Schematic of NTK-FL. Each workerfirst receives the weight w(k) ， and then uploadsthe Jacobian tensor J(mk) ， label Ym ， and initialcondition f(k) (Xm ). The server builds a globalkernel H(k) and performs the weight evolutionwith {t1, . . . , tΨ}. We use (9) to find the best tjand update the weight accordingly.
Figure 3: Training results of 300 workers viaNTK-FL and FedAvg, along with variants withthe local dataset subsampling and random pro-jection, denoted as NTK-FL0 and FedAvg0 , re-spectively. We train a two-layer multilayer per-ceptron on the Fashion-MNIST dataset. Thejoint effect causes more accuracy degradation inFedAvg (red) than in NTK-FL (black).
Figure 2: Schematic of CP-NTK-FL. A trustedkey server (orange) sends an encrypted seedE(k+m , P) with the public key k+m for random pro-jection. The client transmits the required messageto the shuffling server (blue) for permutation.
Figure 4: Test accuracy versus communication round of different methods evaluated on: (a) EM-NIST dataset, where the heterogeneity comes from feature skewness. (b) non-IID MNIST datasetwith label skewness, where the Dirichlet distribution parameter α = 0.5. (c) non-IID Fashion-MNIST dataset with label skewness, where the Dirichlet distribution parameter α = 0.5. NTK-FLoutperforms all baseline FL algorithms in different scenarios, and achieves similar test performancecompared with the ideal centralized training case.
Figure 5: Test accuracy versus the Dirichlet distri-bution parameter α for different methods evaluatedon the non-IID Fashion-MNIST dataset. Reducingthe value of α will increase the degree of hetero-geneity in the data distribution. NTK-FL is robustto different heterogeneous data distributions, andshows more advantages over FedAvg and FedNovawhen the degree of heterogeneity is larger.
Figure 6: CP-NTK-FL test accuracy for dif-ferent hyperparams. A larger data samplingrate β and a larger dimension d01 are expectedto give a higher test accuracy. In general, thescheme is robust to different combinations ofhyperparameters.
Figure 7: Test accuracy versus communicationround of different methods evaluated on the non-IID CIFAR-10 dataset, where the Dirichlet distri-bution parameter α = 0.1.
