Figure 1: Overview of CTML framework. For each incoming taskTi, part (a) extracts path representation and performs clustering; part(b) extracts feature representation and performs clustering; part (c)generates task-aware modulation for global initialization; part (d) re-constructs path cluster assignment from feature cluster assignment.
Figure 2: Illustration ofCTML task learning process.
Figure 3: Understanding the path learning mechanism. (a) 6 tasks (5-way 1-shot) are randomlysampled from Aircraft, Flower and Traffic Sign sub-datasets. (b) PCA visualization of the 5-steprehearsed learning paths (upper plot) and the corresponding path embeddings generated by the GRU(lower plot) for the 6 tasks. (c) Visualization of Z gate (how much to retain for the current step input)and r gate (how much to retain for the previous step memory) of GRU at each step t for the 6 tasks.
Figure 4: (a) Effect of varying kfeat and kpath forMovieLens dataset. (b) Shortcut approximation of pathcluster assignment for a user from MovieLens dataset,where kfeat = 8 and kpath = 16.
Figure 5:	Visualizing path learning results of 6 tasks (5-way 1-shot) randomly sampled from Bird,Fungi and Texture sub-datasets (2 tasks from each sub-dataset).
Figure 6:	Visualizing path learning results of 6 tasks (5-way 1-shot) randomly sampled from Bird,Aircraft and Traffic Sign sub-datasets (2 tasks from each sub-dataset).
Figure 7:	Visualizing path learning results of 6 tasks (5-way 1-shot) randomly sampled from Fungi,Flower and Texture sub-datasets (2 tasks from each sub-dataset).
Figure 8: Visualizing path learning results of 6users randomly selected from MovieLens-1M.
Figure 9: Visualizing path learning results of 6users randomly selected from MovieLens-1M.
Figure 10: Visualizing path learning results of 6users randomly selected from Amazon-CDs.
Figure 11: Visualizing path learning results of 6users randomly selected from Amazon-CDs.
Figure 12:	Shortcut approximation of path cluster assignment from feature cluster assignment for 2users sampled from MovieLens-1M dataset. Here, We set kfeat = 8 and kpath = 16.
Figure 13:	Shortcut approximation of path cluster assignment from feature cluster assignment for 3tasks sampled from 3 different image sub-datasets. Here, We set kfeat = kpath = 6.
