Figure 1: SpecTRA architecture. Besides introducing a dynamic filtering module for learning mul-tiple filters per attention head, position encoding schemes are used in a plug-and-play manner.
Figure 2: Aggregate Filter Frequency response (K is filter order). (a)〜(b) are on MUTAG and (C)〜(e) are on NCI1. X axis shows the normalized frequency with magnitudes on the Y axis.
Figure 3: Filter Frequency response on individual graphs. Graph (a) is from MUTAG and, (b)〜(e)are from the NCI1 dataset and Figures (f)〜(j) are the corresponding frequency responses. X axisshows the normalized frequency with magnitudes on the Y axis.
Figure 4:	Graphs and Filter Frequency response for the graphs on the Synthetic1 dataset for thecase with K = 4 and h = 1. Figure (a) is a graph that illustrates low frequency signals (here, weobserve the neat clusters as expected for low frequency information). Figure (b) represents a graphwith a high frequency component (we observe the mixing of signals in nodes of the same cluster,i.e., different intra-cluster signal values). Finally, figure (c) is the aggregated frequency responseacross the dataset with the normalized frequency along the X-axis and associated magnitudes onthe Y-axis. Here we note the filter has learned the two components of the graph spectrum: the lowfrequency and the high frequency components.
Figure 5:	Filter Frequency response on individual graphs on the ZINC dataset for a filter order of4. Figures (a)〜(d) are the graphs from the dataset and Figures (e)〜(g) are the correspondingfrequency responses. X axis shows the normalized frequency with magnitudes on the Y axis.
Figure 6:	Filter Frequency response on individual graphs on the ZINC dataset for a filter order of8. Figures (a)〜(d) are the graphs from the dataset and Figures (e)〜(g) are the correspondingfrequency responses. X axis shows the normalized frequency with magnitudes on the Y axis.
Figure 7:	Filter Frequency response on individual graphs on the MolHIV dataset. Figures (a)〜(d)are the graphs from the dataset and Figures (e)〜(h) are the corresponding frequency responses. Xaxis shows the normalized frequency with magnitudes on the Y axis.
Figure 8: Filter Frequency response on individual graphs on the PATTERN dataset. Figures (a)〜(d) are the graphs from the dataset and Figures (e)〜(h) are the corresponding frequency responses.
Figure 9: Filter Frequency response on individual graphs on the CLUSTER dataset. Figures (a)〜(d) are the graphs from the dataset and Figures (e)〜(g) are the corresponding frequency responses.
Figure 10: Attention heat map in spectral space of the sample graphs in ZINC dataset determinedfrom the frequency response in Figure 6 for its each sub-graph (a)-(d). Blue illustrates the lower endof the spectrum and red color shows the higher end of the spectrum.
Figure 11: Attention heat map in spectral space of the sample graphs in MolHIV dataset determinedfrom the frequency response in Figure 7 for its each sub-graph (a)-(d). Blue illustrates the lower endof the spectrum and red color shows the higher end of the spectrum.
