Figure 1:	Grid world environment where the start state is in the bottomleft, and the goal state is in the top right. Actions are continuous (2-dimensional), and give the direction in which the agent take a step.
Figure 2:	Visualisation of the action map-ping learned by BC and the candidate actionslearned with AQuaDem for K = 2 and K = 3and T = 0.01. Each color represents a head ofthe Ψ network.
Figure 3: Influence of thetemperature on resultingcandidate actions learnedwith AQuaDem.
Figure 4: AQua-Dem discretizationloss.
Figure 5: Performance of AQuaDQN against SAC and SACfD baselines. Agents are evaluated every50k environment steps over 30 episodes. We represent the median performance in terms of successrate (bottom) and returns (top) as well as the interquartile range over 10 seeds.
Figure 6: Performance of AQuaDQN against SAC and SACfDbaselines when all are tuned on the Relocate environment. Werepresent the median performance in terms of success rate as wellas the interquartile range over 10 seeds.
Figure 7: Performance of AQuaGAIL against GAIL and BC baselines. Agents are evaluated every50k environment steps over 30 episodes. We represent the median success rate (top row) on the taskas well as the Wasserstein distance (bottom row) of the agent’s state distribution to the expert’s statedistribution as well as the interquartile range over 10 seeds.
Figure 8: Performance of AQuaPlay against SAC and “bang-bang” baselines. Agents are evaluatedevery 50k environment steps over 30 episodes. We represent the median return as well as theinterquartile range over 10 seeds.
Figure 9: Visualizations of the Adroit and Robodesk environments.
Figure 10: SAC median and interquartile range on 10 seeds on the 5 Open Gym environments.
Figure 11: SAC and AQuaDQN medians and interquartile ranges on 10 seeds on the Open Gymenvironments. These configurations are the ones that were selected to perform best on Adroit and notfor Mujoco. One can see in Figure 10 that SAC can perform much better on Mujoco Gym after 1Msteps when selecting hyperparameters on the environments themselves.
