Figure 2: Example scenarios in the hint-guess game. The Hinter and Guesser are dealt a hand ofcards where each card has a randomly sampled letter [A-C] and number [1-3]. All cards are visibleto both players. Only the Hinter knows which of the Guesser’s cards is the target card, outlined witha dotted red line above. The goal of the game is for the Guesser to select the target card but the onlyactions the Hinter can take is to point to one of their own cards. Shown above are four hand craftedscenarios that test distinct dimensions important for zero-shot coordination. The highlighted yellowcard corresponds to a human interpretable choice. The two right scenarios require agents to reasonabout implicatures, i.e., the interpretable choice has zero feature overlap with the target card. Modelperformance is shown in Table 2.
Figure 3: Cross-play performance. Visualization of paired evaluation of different agents trainedunder the same method. The top row is the result for the full hint-guess game and the bottom rowis the result for a simplified game where the Hinter and Guesser agents are always dealt the exactsame hand. The y-axis represents the agent index of the Hinter and the x-axis represents the agentindex of the Guesser. Each block in the grid is obtained by evaluating the pair of agents on 10Kgames with different random seeds. Numerical performance is shown in Table 1.
Figure 4: Policy Evaluation. The top row shows the conditional probability for the Hinter to hinta particular card (x-axis) when the target card is the card on the y-axis. The bottom row is theconditional probability matrix for the Guesser to guess a particular card (x-axis) when the hintedcard is the card on the y-axis. Each subplot is the sample average of 20 agent-pairs with differentseeds for 1K games within pair.
Figure 5: Training performance of dif-ferent architectures for the hint-guessgame. The x-axis is the number ofepisodes and y-axis is the mean trainingreward. Solid line is the mean, shadingis the standard error of the mean (s.e.m)across 20 different seeds.
