Figure 1: Maximum deviation D for the three models as a function of certification set size (radius r,left panel) and model smoothness (number of leaves for DT, 'ι norm for LR, max上ins for GAM).
Figure 2: Maximum deviation of f, aRandom Forest, trained on the Adult In-come dataset.
Figure 3: Decision tree reference model with 8 leaves for the Adult Income dataset.
Figure 4: Coefficient values of the logistic regression model with C = 0.01 (16 nonzeros) for theAdult Income dataset.
Figure 6: Maximum deviation D for decision trees on the Adult Income dataset as a function of thenumber of leaves.
Figure 7: Maximum deviation D (at certification set radius rAdult Income dataset.
Figure 8: Maximum deviation D vs. robust accuracy ( = 0.1, r0.1) on the Adult Income dataset.
Figure 9: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for a logistic regression model with inverse`1 penalty C = 0.01, as a function of certification set size (radius r) and broken down by leaves ofthe decision tree reference model.
Figure 10: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for logistic regression models with different'ι penalties C, broken down by leaves of the decision tree reference model. The certification set '∞ball radius is r = 0.2.
Figure 11: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for an Explainable Boosting Machine withmax_bins = 8, as a function of certification set size (radius r) and broken down by leaves of thedecision tree reference model.
Figure 12: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for Explainable Boosting Machines withdifferent max_bins values, broken down by leaves of the decision tree reference model. The certi-fication set '∞ ball radius is r = 0.2.
Figure 13: Time to compute maximum deviation for logistic regression models (left) and Explain-able Boosting Machines (right) on the Adult Income dataset as a function of certification set size(radius r). The filled-in region shows the min-max variation with model complexity (`1 norm forLR, max_bins for EBM).
Figure 14: Effectiveness of pruning by bound for tree-based modelsFeature combinations that maximize deviation In Tables 3 and 4, we report feature values thatmaximize deviation over selected leaves of the DT reference model, for LR and GAM respectively.
Figure 15: Decision tree reference model with 8 leaves for the Lending Club dataset.
Figure 16: Coefficient values of the logistic regression model with C = 0.01 (12 nonzeros) for theLending Club dataset.
Figure 18: Maximum deviation D for logistic regression models on the Lending Club dataset as afunction of certification set size (radius r) and model smoothness (`1 norm).
Figure 19: Maximum deviation D for Explainable Boosting Machines on the Lending Club datasetas a function of certification set size (radius r) and model smoothness (max上ins parameter).
Figure 20: Maximum deviations computed for tree and tree ensembles on the Lending Club datasetMaximum deviation summary Figures 18-20 show maximum deviation as functions of certifi-cation set radius r and model complexity parameters, in a similar manner as Figures 1 and 2 for theAdult Income dataset. The qualitative patterns are similar to before: increasing maximum deviationin all cases except with the number of RF estimators in Figure 20b, where the upper bound is stablearound 0.7. A major quantitative difference is that the maximum deviations for the GAM in Fig-ure 19 are much lower than for the other models, in particular LR in Figure 18. This is likely due to33Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022leaf 5O O O O 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 0 5 0 5 0 5 02 1 1 2 11 - 1 2 11 - 1sppo,6o- sppo,6o- sppo,6o-30----min----min r→∞maxmax r→∞....referenceleaf 7
Figure 21: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for a logistic regression model with inverse`1 penalty C = 0.01 on the Lending Club dataset, as a function of certification set size (radius r)and broken down by leaves of the decision tree reference model.
Figure 22: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for logistic regression models with different`1 penalties C on the Lending Club dataset, broken down by leaves of the decision tree referencemodel. The certification set '∞ ball radius is r = 0.2.
Figure 23: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for an Explainable Boosting Machine withmax_bins = 8 on the Lending Club dataset, as a function of certification set size (radius r) andbroken down by leaves of the decision tree reference model.
Figure 24: Minimum and maximum predicted log-odds for Explainable Boosting Machines withdifferent max_bins values on the Lending Club dataset, broken down by leaves of the decision treereference model. The certification set '∞ ball radius is r = 0.2.
Figure 25: Time to compute maximum deviation for logistic regression models (left) and Explain-able Boosting Machines (right) on the Lending Club dataset as a function of certification set size(radius r). The filled-in region shows the min-max variation with model complexity (`1 norm forLR, max_bins for EBM).
Figure 26: Effectiveness of pruning by bound for tree-based models on the Lending Club datasetFeature combinations that maximize deviation Tables 7 and 8 present the feature values thatmaximize deviation for LR and GAM respectively. For both tables, the minimum log-odds over leaf5 of the DT reference model is selected (corresponding to Figures 21 and 23, leaf 5, blue curve)because this choice maximizes the deviation overall for most values of r.
