Figure 1: Solution quality i.e. objective function value as a function of the number of data pointsanalyzed for all our online algorithms and also the offline greedy algorithm. All our online algorithmsgive comparable (or even better) performance to offline greedy using only a single pass and a smallfraction of the memory.
Figure 2: Results comparing our online NDPP learning algorithm to the offline learning algorithm.
Figure 3:	Results comparing the number of determinant computations as a function of the number ofdata points analyzed for all our online algorithms. Online-2-neighbor requires the most number ofdeterminant computations but also gives the best results in terms of solution value. Online-LSS andOnline-Greedy use very similar number of determinant computations.
Figure 4:	Results comparing the number of swaps of all our online algorithms. Online-Greedy doesthe most number of swaps and therefore has the least consistent solution set. On most datasets, thenumber of swaps by Online-2-neighbor is very similar to Online-LSS.
Figure 5:	Solution quality as a function of the number of data points analyzed in the random streamparadigm. Online-2-neighbor and Online-LSS give very similar performance in this setting and theyare always better than Online-Greedy.
Figure 6:	Number of determinant computations and swaps as a function of the number of data pointsanalyzed in the random stream setting. Online-2-Neighbor needs more determinant computationsthan Online-LSS but has very similar number of swaps in this setting. Note that = α - 1UOAn-OSAmazon Apparel Reg.
Figure 7:	Performance of Online-LSS varying for k = 8. Solution quality, number of determinantcomputations, and number of swaps seem to increase with decreasing .
Figure 8:	Comparing the effect of set size k and on the solution, number of determinant computa-tions, and number of swaps for Online-lss.
Figure 9:	Heatmaps of the kernel matrices learned by our online algorithm (top) looks very similarto the ones learned offline using all data (bottom).
