Figure 1: (a) The first environment for evaluation of sprl is a maze task simulated in MuJoCo(Todorov et al., 2012), in which a point-mass needs to move in a maze of circular shape to reachdesired target positions. (b) The target position is encoded via the contextual variable c ∈ C⊆R2 .
Figure 2: a) Achieved success rate of different curricula and a uniform sampling baseline (Ran-dom) over iterations. Mean and standard error are computed from 10 runs. b) Parametric and non-parametric context distributions pν (c) and pα,η (c) for a run of G-SPRL and NP-SPRL respectively.
Figure 3: (a) The point mass environment with its two-dimensional context space. The target distri-butions μι(c) and μ2(c) encode the two gates with width Wg =0.5, in which the agent (black dot)is required to navigate through a narrow gate at different positions to reach the goal (red cross). (b)Discounted cumulative return over iterations obtained under different curricula for both distribu-tions. Statistics (mean and standard error) are computed from 10 seeds.
Figure 4: (a) Mean KL divergences between μι(c) and the final context distribution computed byG- and NP-SPRL as well as the minimum and maximum over 10 seeds. (b) and (c) visualize pα,η(c)of NP-SPRL and pν (c) of G-SPRL for increasing iterations of the algorithms (left to right).
Figure 5: (a) Mean KL divergences between μ2(c) and the final context distribution computed byG- and NP-SPRL as well as the minimum and maximum over 10 seeds. (b) and (c) visualize pα,η(c)of NP-SPRL and pν (c) of G-SPRL for increasing iterations of the algorithms (left to right).
Figure 6: Interpolations between unimodal (left) and bi-model (right) distributions p1 (c) and p2(c)via a KL divergence-based interpolation and Wasserstein barycenters (5). In one case, all distribu-tion are Gaussians or mixture of Gaussians (blue). In the other case, the distributions are uniformdistributions (orange). The Wasserstein barycenters are computed using a particle-based approxima-tion (Feydy et al., 2019). The visualized PDFs are then estimated using a kernel density estimation.
Figure 7: Visualizations of the empirical distributions pβ generated by WB-SPRL in the maze- (a)and point-mass environments for both target distributions μι(c) and μ2(c) ((b) + (c)).
Figure 8: (a) A wb-sprl curriculum for the pick-and-place task. The vertical dotted lines andsmall images visualize the states corresponding to different time steps of the expert trajectory. Thecolored bars indicate the context distributions pβ(c) for different iterations of WB-SPRL. The corre-spondence between color and algorithm is shown via the colorbar on the right. (b) Success rates overiterations for different learning algorithms in the pick and place task for target distribution μι (c) andμ2(c). Mean and standard error is computed from 10 algorithm runs.
Figure 9: a) Performance on the TeachMyAgent benchmark in the no expert knowledge setting.
Figure 10: Wasserstein barycenters between two distributions p0(c) and p1 (c). The above fig-ures visualize the barycenters pw(c) = arg minp wW2(p, p1) + (1 - w)W2(p,p0) for w =0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1 (from left to right). The target p1 (c) is shown in green, while the respec-tive barycenter pw (c) is shown in blue.
Figure 11: Final trajectories generated by the different investigated curricula in the point mass en-vironment. The color encodes the context: Blue represents gates positioned at the left and red gatespositioned at the right.
Figure 12: Visualization of the curriculum distribution pα,η (c) of NP-SPRL for different iterationsin the pick and place tasks. (a) shows the curriculum generated for the Gaussian target distributionμι(c). (b) shows the curriculum in case of using the Dirac-delta-like distribution μ2(c).
