Figure 1:	The RCRMR-LDproblem setting aims to re-move the information regard-ing the restricted/excludedclasses ({C1e, .., CNe }) fromall layers of a trained modelMo while preserving its pre-dictive power for the remain-ing classes ({C1ne, .., CNne })using limited training data.
Figure 2:	ERwP identifiesthose parameters in the modelthat are highly relevant tothe restricted classes. To ob-tain these parameters, ERwPmodifies training images froma restricted class using adata augmentation f and per-forms backpropagation usingthe classification loss on thesetraining images. ERwP thenstudies the gradient updatethat each parameter receivesin this process in order to iden-tify the highly relevant param-eters for the restricted classes(denoted by dotted circles).
Figure 3:	ERwP only optimizes therestricted class relevant parametersin the model (denoted by dotted cir-cles). ERwP uses Lce , Lcne and Lkdlosses to remove the restricted classinformation from the model whilepreserving its performance on theremaining classes. Lce and Lcne de-note the classification loss on the re-stricted class training examples andthe remaining class training exam-ple, respectively. Lkd denotes theknowledge distillation-based regu-larization loss that preserves thelogits corresponding to only the re-maining classes for all the trainingexamples.
Figure 4: Ablation to validate our approach foridentifying relevant model parameters for a ran-dom restricted class of CIFAR-100.
Figure 5: Plot denoting the performance of ourproposed ERwP during the optimization process.
Figure 6: Ablation to validate our approach for identifying restricted class relevant model parametersusing different augmentation techniques w.r.t. the same randomly chosen restricted class of CIFAR-100. We use the ResNet-56 network for these experiments. The data augmentation techniques usedare (a) grayscale augmentation, (b) vertical flip augmentation, (c) rotation augmentation, (d) randomaffine augmentation. In each case, the figure shows the model performance when the low relevanceand high relevance parameters obtained using our approach are zeroed out.
Figure 7: Plots denoting the performance of our proposed ERwP during the optimization process forforgetting 20 excluded classes from CIFAR-100 using a) ResNet-20 and b) ResNet-56 architectures.
Figure 8: Class activation maps of ImageNet images from the excluded and non-excluded classes, forthe original ResNet-50 (second row) and ResNet-50 after applying our proposed ERwP approach(third row). First row depicts the real images.
