Figure 1: A canonical setup of the recourse action under mixture shifts problem.
Figure 2: Shaded area represents X . Cir-cular arc represents the proximity constraintc(x, x0) = δ. Dashed lines represent the hy-perplane -θbk>x = 0, elliptic curves representthe robust margin -θbk>x + ρk kxk = 0. In-creasing ρk brings the elliptic curves fartheraway from the dash lines, and the set X movesdeeper inside the favorable prediction region.
Figure 3: Impact of magnitude of distribution shifts to empirical validityReal-world data. We use three real-world datasets which capture different data distributionshifts (Dua & Graff, 2017): (i) the German credit dataset, which captures a correction shift. (ii)the Small Business Administration (SBA) dataset, which captures a temporal shift. (iii) the Stu-dent performance dataset, which captures a geospatial shift. Each dataset contains original data andshifted data. We normalize all continuous features to [0, 1]. Similar to Mothilal et al. (2020), weuse one-hot encodings for categorial features, then consider them as continuous features in [0, 1]. Toease the comparison, we choose K = 1. To estimate (θ1, Σ1), we split randomly 80% of the originaldataset and train a logistic classifier. This process is repeated independently 100 times to obtain 100observations of the model parameters, then we compute the empirical mean and covariance matrixfor (θ1, Σ1). In parallel, we randomly split 80-20 the shifted dataset 100 times, and each time traina logistic classifier on the training set. This procedure generates 100 future model parameters.
Figure 4: Synthetic data shifts and the corresponding model parameter shifts (decision boundaries).
Figure 5: Parameter θ of the classifier with different types of data distribution shiftsTo evaluate how magnitude of upper bound cost affects the validity of our models, we use differentvalues of upper bound cost. We define δ = δmin + δadd with δmin is defined in (7). We use the sameparameters as above for generating synthetic data. For each value of δadd , we evaluate the validityby using 100 classifiers trained on 100 different data distribution shifts with 3 different shift types.
Figure 6: Impact of choosing δadd to the validity of DiRRAcAdditional results for the Impact of magnitude of distribution shifts to empirical validity.
Figure 7: Impact of magnitude of distribution shifts to empirical validity of Gaussian DiRRAc13Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022To evaluate the trade-offs between the l1 cost and the validity of DiRRAc, we benchmark these twocriteria by running DiRRAc with different values of δ. We define δ = δmin + δadd as before. Foreach value of δ, we evaluate the l1 cost and validity by using 100 classifiers trained on 100 differentdata distribution shifts with 3 different shift types.
Figure 8: Cost of robustness of DiRRAcA~p=e> zs1.00.90.80.70.60.53.4	3.6	3.8	4.0	4.2	4.4I1 costFigure 9: Comparison of M2 validity as a function of the l1 distance between input instance and therecourse for our DiRRAc method and ROARReal-world data. For each of three real-world datasets, we choose a number of features to bench-mark with other baselines:14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022•	For German credit dataset from UCI repository, we choose 5 features: Status, Duration,Credit amount, Personal status, Age. We found in the description of two datasets thatfeature Status in the data correction shift dataset corrects the coding errors in the originaldataset (Dua & Graff, 2017).
Figure 9: Comparison of M2 validity as a function of the l1 distance between input instance and therecourse for our DiRRAc method and ROARReal-world data. For each of three real-world datasets, we choose a number of features to bench-mark with other baselines:14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022•	For German credit dataset from UCI repository, we choose 5 features: Status, Duration,Credit amount, Personal status, Age. We found in the description of two datasets thatfeature Status in the data correction shift dataset corrects the coding errors in the originaldataset (Dua & Graff, 2017).
