Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed representation scheme. For each observed condition, wepropose to characterize its semantic modulation effect by a collection F of sentences with differentthe central tokens. Then we use category theory to formulate the properties of this collection. Aseach substituted sequence can be represented by a language model, we can also formulate a categorydefinition for vectors, which can be further characterized by manifold analysis. Therefore, we canuse the properties of manifold M to represent the properties of collection F .
Figure 2: (a) An example of star graph where each element in the token substitution set has a prob-ability of connecting to the real context, as determined by the local fuzzy set as in UMAP. (b) Theeffect of topology of [CLS] token before fine-tuning, as evaluated by functional characterization. (c)The effect of topology of [CLS] token after fine-tuning, as evaluated by functional characterization.
Figure 3: (a) The disappearance of neighbors in the manifold given by the first layer. (b) Theemergence of neighbors in the manifold given by the last layer. The y-axis is the average probabilityof connection and the band width is the variance. Note that we label the embedding layer as thelayer 0, the last FFN layer as the layer 24 and separately count the attention and FFN layers in oneTransformer layer. Therefore, a layer with odd number index is an attention layer and a layer witheven number index is an FFN layer. (c) The IoU trend between different layers. Each IoU value iscalculated with last layer or last layer of the same type. The results of tokens with different POS canbe found in the Appendix.
Figure 4: The overwriting of local topology in different Transformer layers. Note that we treat theembedding layer as the layer 0 and separately count the attention and FFN layers in one Transformerlayer. Therefore, a layer with odd number index is an attention layer and a layer with even numberindex is an FFN layer. We record changing trajectory of the top 10 neighbors of the real context ateach layer.
Figure 5: The IoU trend results of different parts of speech. (a) All. (b) Adjective. (C) Noun. (d)Verb. We sample the top 10 most frequent tokens of each POS and get the average score.
