Figure 1: Overview of the Multi-Trigger-Key framework. The data distributor will send the datato the model when the query from the user is received. Without any secret key (i.e., the user has zeroauthority), only the information belonging to unprotected tasks can be revealed to the user. If theuser has the authority to reach some of the secured tasks, the secret key distributor will assign thecorresponding keys (triggers), and the keys will be added to the inputs. Each key can reveal one taskof the secured tasks. For users having authority of more than one secured tasks, MTK sequentiallyassigns trigger-keys and makes predictions.
Figure 2: Two examples of trigger-keys. We use square (S1)and cross (C2) to protect Age and Race, respectively. The shape,size, color can be varied.
Figure 3:	Prediction accuracies of secured tasks of unprocessed data are close to randomguesses once (VGG16) models are well trained on different sizes of trigger-keys. However,when the model is trained on 3 × 3 square (S1) and cross (C2), the model fails to protect therace information. All experiments are conducted on VGG16 architecture. Perturbations in S1 (C2)are fixed to [255, 0, 0] ([0, 255, 0]).
Figure 4:	Once (ResNet18) models are well trained on different sizes of trigger-keys, predictionaccuracies of secured tasks of unprocessed data are close to random guesses for trigger-keysfrom 3 × 3 to 11 × 11. All experiments are conducted on ResNet18 architecture. Perturbations inS1 (C2) are fixed to [255, 0, 0] ([0, 255, 0]). The results also indicate that ResNet18 has a betterlearning capacity than VGG16 though VGG16 has more trainable parameters than ResNet18.
Figure 5:	Prediction accuracies of secured tasks of unprocessed data are all close to randomguesses for trigger-keys of various perturbations. All experiments are conducted on VGG16architecture. Sizes of S1 and C2 are fixed to 5 × 5.
Figure 6: Both prediction accuracy and cosine similarity increase when the number of pixelsin the test trigger-keys increase. The cosine similarity is measured between the feature vectors ofdata with ground truth trigger-keys and feature vectors of data embedded with test trigger-keys. Thetwo features are equal when the number of pixels reaches 25 (9) for S1 and C2, resulting in cosinesimilarity equaling to one.
Figure 7: Both prediction accuracy and cosine similarity increase when the magnitude of pixelsin the test trigger-keys increase. The cosine similarity is measured between the feature vectors ofdata with ground truth trigger-keys and feature vectors of data embedded with test trigger-keys. Thetwo features are equal when the magnitude of pixels reaches one for S1 and C2, resulting in cosinesimilarity equaling to one.
