Figure 1: The proposed generative negative replay is compared with classical generative replay ontwo complex class incremental CL benchmarks (details in section 4.2). In both the benchmarks, usingthe same classifier, generator, and training procedure, negative replay performs significantly better.
Figure 2: Graphical representation of the negative replay idea. Green output neurons representthe classes present in the current experience, while red output neurons represent the replay classes.
Figure 3: Overall accuracy on CORe50 NC scenario, using the whole test set (even at intermediateexperiences) as defined in the CORe50 protocol (Lomonaco & Maltoni, 2017) (left), and on ImageNet-1000 using a growing test set as defined by Masana et al. (2020) (right). For a direct comparison ofthe two benchmarks, a plot of the experiments on CORe50 NC using a growing test set is included inAppendix H. Every experiment is averaged over 3 runs using different seeds and class order. Thestandard deviation is reported in light colors. Better viewed on a computer monitor.
Figure 4: Overall accuracy on CORe50 NIC391 scenario, using the whole test set as defined in theCORe50 protocol (Lomonaco & Maltoni, 2017). Every experiment is averaged over 3 runs usingdifferent seeds and class order. The standard deviation is reported in light colors. better viewed on acomputer monitor.
Figure 5: Graphical representation of the naive negative replay. The output neurons are depicted ingreen for neurons associated with original data, and in red for output neurons associated to replaydata. The loss vector of original data is backpropagated through all the weights of the network (yellowarrows), so the gradient is accumulated by every weight. On the other hand, the loss vector of replaydata is masked, and the loss is only backpropagated through the output neurons corresponding to theoriginal classes. Thus, the gradient is accumulated only on the classification head weights associatedwith the classes present in the current experience.
Figure 6: Overall accuracy on CORe50 NC scenario of the naive negative replay, using the whole testset as defined in the CORe50 protocol Lomonaco & Maltoni (2017). Every experiment is averagedover 3 runs using different seeds and class order. The standard deviation is reported in light colors.
Figure 7: A visual schema of the generative model training. Losses are represented by dashed arrows.
Figure 8: Overall accuracy on the CORe50 NC scenario, using a growing test set. After eachexperience, the model was evaluated using a test composed of only data belonging to the classes seenso far, similar to the benchmark proposed by Masana et al. (2020). Every experiment is averagedover 3 runs, with different seeds and class order. The standard deviation is reported in light colors.
Figure 9: Overall accuracy on the CORe50 NC scenario for all the experiments performed in thiswork (included random data and negative replay with original data). After each experience, the modelwas evaluated using the cumulative test set as proposed by Lomonaco & Maltoni (2017). Everyexperiment is averaged over 3 runs, with different seeds and class order. The standard deviation isreported in light colors. better viewed if zoomed on a computer monitor.
Figure 10: Overall accuracy on the ImageNet-1000 NC scenario for all the experiments performed inthis work (included random data and negative replay with original data). After each experience, themodel was evaluated using the whole test set as proposed by Masana et al. (2020). Every experimentis averaged over 3 runs, with different seeds and class order. The standard deviation is reported inlight colors. better viewed if zoomed on a computer monitor.
Figure 11: Overall accuracy on the CORe50 NIC scenario for all the experiments performed in thiswork (included random data and negative replay with original data). After each experience, the modelwas evaluated using the cumulative test set as proposed by Lomonaco & Maltoni (2017). Everyexperiment is averaged over 3 runs, with different seeds and class order. The standard deviation isreported in light colors. better viewed if zoomed on a computer monitor.
