Figure 1: Illustration of our Saliency Attack and current SOTA gradient-free black-box attacks. (a)BP saliency maps, specific to a given image and the corresponding class; (b) binary salient masks,generated by saliency object segmentation and roughtly accord with the region of the salient pixelsin BP saliency maps; (c) perturbation, produced by refining in salient regions of (b); (d) final AEsof our Saliency Attack; (e-f) AEs of SOTA black-box attacks (Moon et al., 2019; Andriushchenkoet al., 2020) whose perturbations are visible to human eyes; (g) original image.
Figure 3: The illustration of refining on atree structure corresponding to the imageblocks. Among initial blocks, each blockis a root node of a tree, and its child nodesare the finer blocks in the current block.
Figure 4: Examples of SOTA black-box attacks compared with their modefied version with segmen-tation priors. (a) binary salient mask; (b-e) pairs of AEs and their perturbation.
Figure 5: Examples of our Saliency Attack and other compared attacks. (a-d) pairs of AEs and theirperturbation; (e) BP saliency maps.
Figure 7:	Examples of DFS-seg	attack with different	initial block sizes. (a)	binary salient	mask;(b-d) exmaples of Saliency Attack with different initial block sizes; (e) BP saliency map.
Figure 8: Examples of Saliency Attack with different strategies.
Figure 9: MAD scores of Parsimonious Attack vs. Parsimonious-seg attack and Square Attack vs.
Figure 10: Adversarial examples generated by boundary attack with different MAD scores. We canfind the threshold MAD ≤ 30 is roughly enough to indicate an imperceptible adversarial example.
Figure 11: Queries vs. True Success Rate under different thresholds of MAD scoresA.5 Comparison of SALIENCY Attack with other attacksWe randomly choose 10,000 examples from the ImageNet validation set and divide them into 10groups. Then we test different attacks under 3000 query budget and report their mean and stan-dard deviation (SD). The best results are recorded in bold based on Wilcoxon signed-rank test withsignificance level at 0.05. We can find that our Saliency Attack is significantly better than all thebaselines.
