Figure 1: MCLnn framework.
Figure 2: Results of the forward simulation of linear spring system from the same initial config-uration using ground truth (continuous line), baseline Lnn (dashed and dotted line) and MCLnn(dashed lines). (a) The evolution of Lagrangian, Hamiltonian (total energy), linear and momentumfor all the systems. (b) The error in Lagrangian, Hamiltonian (total energy), linear and momentumpredicted by the baseline Lnn and MCLnn with respect to the ground truth.
Figure 3: Results of the forward simulation of non-linear spring, and gravitational system from thesame initial configuration using ground truth (continuous line) and MCLnn (dashed lines). (a) Theevolution of Lagrangian, Hamiltonian (total energy), linear and momentum for all the systems. (b)The error in Lagrangian, Hamiltonian (total energy), linear and momentum predicted by the baselineLnn and MCLnn with respect to the ground truth.
Figure 4: Results of the forward simulation of (a) linear spring with 6 particles, (b) non-linear springwith 6 particles, and (b) gravitational system with 8 particles from the same initial configurationusing ground truth (continuous line) and MCLnn (dashed lines). The evolution of Lagrangian forall the systems are plotted.
Figure 5: Variation of Vij with respect to qij as learned by the MCLNN (dashed line) in comparisonto the ground truth (continuous line) for (a) linear spring, (b) non-linear spring, and (c) gravitationalpotential. The shaded region represents the range of qij values in the training set. Non-shaded regionbetween two shaded region corresponds to interpolation; otherwise, it represents extrapolation.
Figure 6: Predicted force for (a) linear spring, (b) non-linear spring, and (c) gravitational systemwith respect to the measured forces on the test dataset of baseline Lnn.
Figure 7: Results of the forward simulation of (a) linear spring, (b) non-linear spring, and (b) gravita-tional system from the same initial configuration using ground truth (continuous line) and MCLnn(dashed lines). The evolution of Lagrangian, Hamiltonian (total energy), linear and angular mo-menta for all the systems with different number of particles than that was present in the training setare plotted.
