Figure 1: Exploration Flow: The agent aims to explore the environment given the guidancefrom low-level language instructions, previous exploration actions, and the explored area wherethe agent has visited and made observations. Execution Flow: Given the language instructions andthe affordance-aware semantic representation (i.e., semantic map) acquired during exploration, theagent executes the subgoals sequentially. It uses a planning module (which consumes the semanticmap) for navigation subgoals and an object interaction transformer for other subgoals.
Figure 2: Illustration of the affordance-aware semantic representation used in our framework.
Figure 3: The exploration module. Consisting of several transformer-based networks, the ex-ploration module operates at a subgoal level. Given a navigation subgoal during inference, it takesmultiple modalities as input including language instructions for the current and subsequent sub-goals, egocentric observations from the agent, and exploration actions in the past as well as theircorresponding explored area. It predicts the next exploration action carried out in the environmentauto-regressively. Illustrated is an example where given 4 previous actions the model tries to predictthe 5-th. Note that for brevity the positional (and temporal) encoding layers right before the trans-former encoders are omitted in the figure.
Figure 4: An illustration of the single-step explored area for four exploration steps (left) and theaggregated one (right). The actual size of a single-step explored area is 5 × 3 instead of 3 × 2 shownhere.
Figure 5: For the task “Move a watch to the inside of a small safe”, the first row and second rowcorresponds to trajectories predicted by ours and E.T. Each column corresponds to a different timestep with t = 0, 6, 12, 18, 24, 32, 35, 36 from left to right.
Figure 6: For the task “Place two spray bottles on a toilet tank.”, the first row and second rowcorresponds to trajectories predicted by ours and E.T. Each column corresponds to a different timestep with t = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 35, 41 from left to right.
