Figure 1: Arithmetic coding andAriEL. In this illustrative example, thegenerating context-free grammar (CFG)is S T α∖b∖αα∖αb∖αc∖bc∖αbc∖bcc1 and thebar plot on top indicates the frequencyof those sentences in the dataset, as anextra bias to the language. ArithmeticCoding (middle) encodes any sequence ofthis CFG over a single dimension within[0,1], and the frequency of the sentencedetermines the length assigned on thatsegment. AriEL (bottom) is a multidi-mensional extension of AC (here in 2D),where the frequency information is pre-served in the volumes. The LanguageModel provides the boundaries where thenext symbols are to be found. For a 2Dlatent space, d = 2, the axis to split tofind symbol st is dt = t mod d. ⅛ = 0,1represent the horizontal and vertical axis.
Figure 2: Interpolations between ran-dom points in AriEL’s latent space,and amount of valid sentences gener-ated in between. For a low latent dimen-sion all sentences are very densely packed,and in the extreme of d = 1, all sentencesare found on the same axis. As d increases,the sentences are redistributed in [0, 1]dand less sentences are found in a givendirection. The lower bound at 0.746 canchange depending on the training dataset.
Figure S1: Random-sampling-based generation in the first row, and encodingof input sentences in the remaining rows. A sentence is represented by a point inthe latent space. First row shows the proportion of grammatically correct sentences thatcan be decoded by random uniform sampling the latent space. AriEL sampled almostonly grammatical sentences (ungrammatical are so few that are placed on top in the plot).
Figure S2: Radar Chart of the Quantitative Assessment. Latent space of R16 onthe left and R512 on the right. Training was performed on biased sentences. The metricsare defined in Methodology: Generalization is measured by prediction accuracy of unbiasedsentences (PAU), Prediction by prediction accuracy of biased sentences (PAB), grammaraccuracy (GA) and bias accuracy (BA) and Generation by uniqueness (U), validity (V),vocabulary coverage (VC) and grammar coverage (GC). AriEL excels in all the 8 metrics.
Figure S3: The latent space z does not necessarily point at the most likely word. Here thef ind function would return word s4 , the least likely. The bounds define the limits of thedifferent blue areas.
