Figure 1: Related vector fields can be thoughtof as a vector field “morphed” into another.
Figure 2: Vector fields can be related by a diffeomorphismsn-dimensional manifold M, at a point p ∈ M, the tangent space TpM is an n-dimensional realvector space, where each element passes p tangentially and is referred to as a tangent vector. Thetangent space provides a higher-dimensional analogue of a tangent plane at a point on a surface. Thecollection of tangent spaces for all points on M is known as the tangent bundle denoted by TM.
Figure 3:	Learning the 3DLotka-Volterra. (Left) InterPolat-ing (red) data (blue); (Right) Generatingtrajectories (red) at hidden test initialconditions and the ground truth (blue).
Figure 4: We model latent dynamics of rotating MNIST“3” characters, as an ODE. We learn the ODE via a diffeo-morPhism and a linear base ODE. Given an unseen test “3”character, we efficiently generate a image sequence of rotat-ing “3”s (illustrated here, from uPPer left to lower right).
Figure 5: Results on chaotic (Lorenz) and stiff (ROBER) systems. Left: A trajectory from the learnedLorentz system in red, with data in blue. Center: The second dimension of the ROBER system,against time in logscale. Our method is much capable at capturing the sudden variation. Right:Quantitative evaluation of our method with a non-linear base ODE and competing integrators onaugmented ODEs with neural network dynamics.
Figure 6: A learned Lorenz system with the generated trajectory, at 10x data resolution, and groundtruth.
Figure 7: A learned Lorenz system with the gene1r7ated trajectory, at 10x data resolution, and groundtruth, rolled out in timeUnder review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022We provide the change in coordinates over time, for the trajectory shown in figure 5(a) in the paper:Figure 8: The corresponding plot showing the coordinates over the time interval of a learned Lorenzsystem over t ∈ [0, 2], at 10x data resolution, which corresponds to the 3d figure shown as fig 5 (left).
Figure 8: The corresponding plot showing the coordinates over the time interval of a learned Lorenzsystem over t ∈ [0, 2], at 10x data resolution, which corresponds to the 3d figure shown as fig 5 (left).
Figure 9: We see that trajectories from the learned Lotka-Volterra system, in red, closely matches theground truth, in blue.
Figure 10: Robot motion trajectories in red, that imitate drawing a “C” character. The ground truth isgiven in blue.
