Figure 1: This figure compares single time-domain images and absolute loge-scaled mean waveletpackets and their standard deviations. The first column shows two example images, the second meanpackets, the third standard deviations, and the fourth mean and standard deviation differences. Meanvalues and standard deviations have been computed on 5K 1024 by 1024 FFHQ- and StyleGAN-generated images each. The order of the packets has the frequency increasing from the top left tothe bottom right. We observe significant differences. The mean is significantly different for higherfrequencies and at image edges. The standard deviations are different on the background across theentire spectrum. The filter application order of each packet is shown on the right of Figure 2. Bestviewed in color.
Figure 2: Visualization of the 2D wavelet packet transform analysis and synthesis packet transform(left). The analysis filters are written as Hk, synthesis filters as Fk. We show all first level coefficientsas well as some second level coefficients aa, ah, av, ad. The dotted lines indicate the omission ofʌfurther possible analysis and synthesis steps. The transform is invertible in principle, I denotes thereconstructed original input. The right side shows the labels for the transforms of level 3 we showedpreviously in the frequency order (Jensen & la Cour-Harbo, 2001).
Figure 3: The mean 3° Haar wavelet packet coefficient values for each 63K 128 X 128 pixel FFHQ(blue) and StyleGAN (orange) images are shown on the left. The shaded area indicates a singlestandard deviation σ. We find higher mean coefficient values for the StyleGAN samples across theboard. As the frequency increases from left to right, the differences become more pronounced. Theplot on the right side shows validation and test accuracy for the identification experiment. Linearregression networks where used to identify FFHQ, StyleGAN, and StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020)images. The blue line shows the pixel and the orange line the training accuracy using loge-scaledabsolute wavelet packet coefficients. Shaded areas indicate a single standard deviation for differentinitializations. We find that working with loge-scaled absolute packets allowed linear separation of allthree images sources. Furthermore, it significantly improves the convergence speed and final result.
Figure 4: Fifth degree Daubechies and Symlet filters side by side.
Figure 5: Sparsity pattern of the 2d level 1 Haar fast wavelet analysis and synthesis matrices.
Figure 6: Sparsity pattern of the 2d level 2 Haar fast wavelet analysis and synthesis matrices.
Figure 7: Sparsity pattern of the 2d level 1 Daubechies-2 fast wavelet analysis and synthesis matrices.
Figure 8: Sparsity pattern of the 2d level 2 Daubechies-2 fast wavelet analysis and synthesis matrices.
Figure 9: Mean validation and test set accuracy of 5 runs of source identification on CelebA for aCNN trained on the raw images and loge-db4 wavelet packets, each using only 20 % of the originaltraining data. The shaded areas indicate a single standard deviation σ.
Figure 10: Haar-Wavelet packet CNN training accuracy on the LSUN (left) and the CelebA (right)datasets.
