Figure 1: Overview of SemiRetro. We decomposite retrosynthesis into two steps: center identification andsynthon completion. In step 1, we use DRGAT to extract molecule features for predicting reaction centers. Bybreaking product bonds in these centers, synthons can be obtained. In step 2, we use another DRGAT model topredict the semi-template for each synthon. The final reactants can be deduced from reaction centers, synthons,and semi-templates by using the residual attachment algorithm.
Figure 2: Reaction centers. Products, reactants, and residuals are circled in blue, green, and red, respectively.
Figure 3: DRGAT: Directed Relational GAT. DRGAT contains two submodules: directed message passing(DMP) and edge-controlled attention (ECA). DMP uses different MLP to learn features of the source (src) andtarget (dst) atoms during message passing. ECA utilizes both atom features and bond features to learn theattention weights.
Figure 4: Semi-template vs. full-template. Semi-template is the local reaction template of each synthon. Afull-template can be decomposed into several simpler semi-templates.
Figure 5: SemiRetro reduces the template redundancy.
Figure 6: The retroSynthesis example: combining top-2 CI and top-3 SC to obtain top-6 retroSynthesis results.
Figure 7: Visualize results of center identification. Case1: the ground truth is atom center, and the top-1 prediction is correct with the probability 99.3%. Case2: The ground truth is edge center, and the top-2prediction is correct with the probability 18.4%.
Figure 8: The overall pipeline of synthon completion. The input synthons are the outputs of the center iden-tification module, coming from the same product molecule. We get the top-5 semi-template predictions andtheir probabilities of each synthon using SemiRetro (synthon completion network), then generate the joint dis-tribution of semi-templates. We choose the top-5 predictions from this joint distribution and apply the residualattachment algorithm (introduced later) to get the final reactants.
