Figure 1: The OpenAI Gym MuJoCo tasks we benchmark out method on.
Figure 2: The average test returns across the training of SOP and SOP without the exploration noise in twovariants: without and with the prior network. All metrics were computed over 30 seeds.
Figure 3: The average test returns across the training of ED2, SOP and SOP without the exploration noise andwithout the prior network. All metrics computed over 30 seeds.
Figure 4: The average test returns across the training of ED2 and the three baselines. The solid lines representaverages, whereas the shaded regions show 95% bootstrap confidence intervals, each being computed over 30seeds.
Figure 5: The Humanoid velocity of ED2 and the three baselines. The solid line represents the average velocityand the shaded region is 95% bootstrap confidence interval over 30 runs of the trained agents with the medianperformance across 30 seeds.
Figure 6: The standard deviation of test returns across training (lower is better), see Section 2.
Figure 7: The dots are the average test returns after training (3M samples) of each seed. The distance betweeneach box’s top and bottom edges is the interquartile range (IQR). The whiskers spread across all values.
Figure 8: RMSD, the average and the 95% bootstrap confidence interval over 30 seeds.
Figure 9: The average test returns across the training of ED2, ED2 with actors initialized to the same randomvalues, and ED2 with the single critic.
Figure 10: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the weighted Bellmanbackup.
Figure 11: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 without clipped doubleQ-Learning in two variants without and with the weighted Bellman backups.
Figure 12: This is a top-down view. Hu-manoid starts at the origin (marked ’x’).
Figure 14: The average test returns across the training of ED2 without (ours) and with prior networks.
Figure 15: The average test returns across the training of ED2 without (ours) and with prior networks.
Figure 16: The average test returns across the training of ED2 with a different number of actor-critics.
Figure 17: The average test returns across the training of ED2 without (ours) and with data bootstrap.
Figure 18: The average test returns across the training of ED2 and SOP with different network sizes.
Figure 19: The average test returns across the training of ED2 and SOP with one or five updates for every stepin an environment.
Figure 20: The average test returns across the training of ED2 with and without the vote policy for exploration.
Figure 21: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the UCB exploration.
Figure 22: The average test returns across the training of ED2 With and Without the additive Gaussian noise forexploration.
Figure 23: The average test returns across the training of ED2 with and without the additive Gaussian noise forexploration. Different noise standard deviations.
Figure 24: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the vote policy forevaluation.
Figure 25: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the vote policy forevaluation.
Figure 26: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the rewards normalization.
Figure 27: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the observations normaliza-tion.
Figure 28: The average test returns across the training of our method and ED2 with the Huber loss.
Figure 29: The average test returns across the training of ED2, ED2 With the single actor for exploitation, andthe baseline.
Figure 30: The standard deviation of test returns across the training of ED2, ED2 With the single actor forexploitation, and the baseline.
Figure 31: The dots are the average test returns after training (3M samples) of each seed of ED2, ED2 with thesingle actor for exploitation, and the baseline. The distance between each box’s top and bottom edges is theinterquartile range (IQR). The whiskers spread across all values.
Figure 32: RMSD of ED2, ED2 With the single actor for exploitation, and the baseline - the average and the95% bootstrap confidence interval over 30 seeds.
Figure 33: The average test returns across the training of ED2, ED2 with the single actor for exploration, andthe baseline.
Figure 34: The average test returns across the training of ED2 with and without the action normalization.
Figure 35: The average test returns across the training of ED2 with and without the ERE replay buffer.
