Figure 1: A digit from MNIST presented at different downsampled resolutions (downscaled resolutions indicatedon top of each image. The top row consists of grayscale images with 0 ≤ color ≤ 1 as in the original dataset.
Figure 2: An example circuit to construct the superposition state for4 qubits, using 4-qubit generalized TOFFOLIgate. We follow standard quantum circuit diagram conventions in which the dots represent the control of a gateby the given qubits.
Figure 3: n-qubit controlled gate in terms of (n - 1)-qubit controlled gates(9)From the recursive properties of the diagram above we see that an n-qubit controlled rotationdecomposes into (2 ∙ 3n - 1) one-qubit controlled rotations. Since We flip at most 2n pixels for agiven image, we see that for each image# one-qubit controlled gates ≤ 2n (2 ∙ 3n - 1)in addition to the standalone X-gates to encode the 2n × 2n image in the amplitudes of the inputWavefunction. Though this bound is exponential in n, We find this acceptable as it is still classicallysimulable for larger images that are primarily constrained by the size of their qubit representations.
Figure 4: A “CRADL” network double layer with 6 pixel qubits, consisting of consecutive pixel-readoutpixel-color XX gates, followed by analogous ZZ gatesWe note that there are equivalent network architectures that lead to comparable results, such as theColor-Readout-Alternating-Mixed-Layer architecture shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: A “CRAML” network layer with 6 pixel qubits, consisting of consecutive pixel-readout pixel-colorXX and ZZ gates6	ResultsWe benchmark our quantum learning framework against a classical neural network with two hiddenlayers with ReLU activations and a single-neuron output layer; in this setting, the quantum andclassical models have a comparable number of parameters. We trained the quantum neural networkfor 10 epochs, which is the same number of epochs after which the classical neural network began tooverfit (as determined by cross-validation). All experiments were conducted on a personal laptopwith no GPU (Macbook Pro, 2.4 GHz 8-Core Intel Core i9 CPU, 64GB 2667 MHz DDR4 RAM).
Figure 6: Test accuracy versus training epoch for classical and quantum models, with and without the extra 2qubit compression described in Section 4.2. When images are embedded on 6 qubits (green curve, left), weachieve performance comparable to classical networks with the same number of parameters. When images arefurther compressed (orange curves), performance degrades.
