Figure 1: Empirical comparison of our upperbound and the existing bounds on CIFAR-10 (C =10). Arora et al.’s and Nozawa & Sato’s boundsare valid only at K + 1 ≥ C . Note that Aroraet al.’s and Ash et al.’s bounds become infinity atK = 512. As can be seen, our bound is the closestapproximator of the true mean supervised losses.
Figure 2: The learning bounds and feasible re-gion. The point F , (R* nt,R*	), is the opti-Cont μ-supvmal point in the feasible region. The points • andare mentioned in the texts.
Figure 3: Visualization of the smallest possible value of Rμ-supv in the feasible region (8) for differentK and C. The dotted lines show the essential lower bounds which come from each loss separately.
Figure 4: Theoretical comparison of our upperbound and the existing bounds (C = 10). Aroraet al.’s and Nozawa & Sato’s bounds are valid onlyat K + 1 ≥ C (the dotted vertical lines).
Figure 5: Learning trajectories of the circle dataset in the (Rcontare plotted with gradient color lines, indicating the epochs.
Figure 6: For each K, eight runs on the circle dataset are averaged with the standard deviationsplotted. (Left) the test mean supervised losses at each epoch with the different negative sample sizesK . (Middle) the test mean supervised accuracy at each epoch with the different negative samplesizes K. (Right) the best test mean supervised loss with the different negative sample sizes K.
Figure 7: Mean and linear classifier’s test accuracy on CIFAR-10/100 and Wiki-3029 when varyingthe negative samples size K. For Wiki-3029, we also change the number of latent classes C. Theerror bars in (a) and parenthesized number in (b) indicate the standard deviation of three runs.
Figure 8: Test accuracy of mean classifier at every 200 epochs on CIFAR-10/100. In CIFAR-100,the accuracy of K = 4 and the others, have a large gap at smaller epochs at epoch 200, but the gapbecome smaller when epochs increase. The error bars indicate the standard deviation of three runs.
Figure 9: Enlarged Figure 1 for the detailed comparison between the proposed bound and thesupervised loss on CIFAR-10/100 datasets. All value is an averaged value among three runs with adifferent random seed. Error bar indicates the standard deviation.
