Figure 1: The homoglyph adversarial examples for sentiment analysis web services (i.e., Amazoncomprehend, Google cloud natural language AI, IBM Watson natural language understanding, andMicrosoft text analytics) generated by HYPOCRITE3.1	HYPOCRITE OverviewIn this subsection, the proposed HYPOCRITE for generating homoglyph adversarial examples isdescribed. The key idea of the HYPOCRITE is to replace English characters with other similarinternational characters (i.e., homoglyph) in order to give dataset noise. Such dataset noise can causemisclassification different from the original results. This is because the original meaning disappearsdue to the noise. With this key idea, HYPOCRITE can generate homoglyph adversarial examplesby appropriately changing text from a word unit to a paragraph through a black-box attacks fornatural language web services. The homoglyph adversarial examples mean text that looks the sameto the human, but causes different results through AI services. Figure 1 shows the four homoglyphadversarial examples for sentiment analysis web services (i.e., Amazon comprehend, Google cloudnatural language AI, IBM Watson natural language understanding, and Microsoft text analytics)generated by HYPOCRITE. As homoglyph adversarial examples, characters with red color and boldfont mean homoglyph that looks the same to our eyes but has different Unicode values. As shownin Figure 1, although they look like the same text to perception, the result of the sentiment analysisweb service is different from positive to negative, respectively. The user study on the perception ofhuman for adversarial examples is explained in detail in Section 4.2.2, and the score for each MLaaScompany’s sentiment analysis result is explained in detail in Section 4.1.
Figure 2: The impact of the Amazon web service platform according to non-targeted and targetedadversarial attacksMicrosoft. Table 2 shows the successful attack rate and perturbed rate of each attack. Broadly, ourattack is divided into two types such as targeted attack and non-targeted attack. Non-targeted attackmeans misclassifying the original sentiment classification into another classification other than theexisting one. On the other hand, the targeted attack is to perturb a positive or negative classificationso that it may be perceived as the specific destination. As shown in Table 2, although the perturbationrates are similar, HYPOCRITE generally performs higher than the baseline (i.e., HOMOGLYPH).
Figure 3: The impact of the Google web service platform according to non-targeted and targetedadversarial attacks(a) Pos to Non	(b) Pos to Neg	(c) Pos to Neu(d) Neg to Non(e) Neg to Pos(f) Neg to NeuFigure 4:	The impact of the IBM web service platform according to non-targeted and targetedadversarial attackswhen HOMOGLYPH performed up to 68.75%, HYPOCRITE performed 100%. Both models’ per-formances of negative to non are lower than positive to non. When HOMOGLYPH performed 27.08percent, HYPOCRITE still performed a superior success rate of 94.20 percent. In targeted attackcases, except for negative to positive, positive to mix, and negative to mix, comparing with HO-MOGLYPH showed less than 40 percent, HYPOCRITE performed significantly high performance.
Figure 4:	The impact of the IBM web service platform according to non-targeted and targetedadversarial attackswhen HOMOGLYPH performed up to 68.75%, HYPOCRITE performed 100%. Both models’ per-formances of negative to non are lower than positive to non. When HOMOGLYPH performed 27.08percent, HYPOCRITE still performed a superior success rate of 94.20 percent. In targeted attackcases, except for negative to positive, positive to mix, and negative to mix, comparing with HO-MOGLYPH showed less than 40 percent, HYPOCRITE performed significantly high performance.
Figure 5:	The impact of the Microsoft web service platform according to non-targeted and targetedadversarial attacksIBM This section shows another performance against IBM through figure 4. As shown in Figure 4,there is a significant different between two model in non-targeted attack. While HOMOGLYPH isshowing intermediate performance in positive to non, it shows fairly low performance. In contrast,HYPOCRITE shows fairly high performance in both scenarios of non-targeted attack. In targetedattack case, unusual result can be found. There were no significant differences compared to otherplatforms within the result of positive to negative and negative to positive that HYPOCRITE demon-strated better performance than HOMOGLYPH. Yet, unlike other web service platforms, both HYP-OCRITE and HOMOGLYPH show poor performance in positive to neutral and negative to neutral.
Figure 6: The user study for perceptionof the homoglyph adversarial examplesgenerated by HYPOCRITE8Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022tifying the number of attack words found by the experi-mental participants in the given text. Figure 6 shows thespecific average attack success rate of expriment partici-pants per platform and the average attack success rate pertext length group. Looking at Figure 6, the longer the text is given to the participant, the higher theattack success rate. In particular, the first group had the lowest at 93.63%, and the seventh groupwith the longest text length was the highest at 98.33%. This shows that the shorter the target text ofan adversarial attack, the easier it is for users to recognize the attack.
