Figure 1: (a)-(b): the trajectory of finding Pareto models that satisfy different ratio constraints (shown indifferent colors) on the two objectives `1 , `2 using EPO and PNG; we can see that PNG can achieve thesame goal as EPO (with different trajectories) while being a more general approach. (c)-(d): the trajectory offinding Pareto models that minimize the weighted distance and complex cosine criterion using PNG. Thegreen dots indicate the converged models. We can see that PNG can successfully locate the correct Paretomodels that minimize different criteria.
Figure 2: Trajectories of solving OPT-in-Pareto with weighted distance and complex cosine as criterion usingPNG. The green dots are the final converged models. PNG is able to successfully locate the correct models inthe Pareto set.
Figure 3: The evolution of Criterion F and the normof MGD gradient when trained using PNG on NYUv2dataset with MTAN network. PNG effectively de-creases the criterion while ensuring the model is withinthe Pareto set, since the norm of MGD gradient remainsunchanged.
Figure 4: Evolution of models from different initialization. Upper row uses initialization with linearscalarization and lower row uses initialization from MDG. From left to right: the evolution of models duringtraining. PNG is robust to initializations. In both two cases of very poor initialization, PNG is still able tomove the models so that they are eventually well distributed on the Pareto set.
Figure 5: Ablation study on OPT-in-Pareto with different ratio constraint of objectives. Upper row, fromleft to right: fixing α = 0.25, γ = 0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.001; Lower row, from left to right: fixing γ = 0.01,α = 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. By comparing the figures in the first row, we find that choosing a too large γ makethe final converged model be far away from the Pareto set, which is as expected. By comparing the figures inthe second row, we find that changing α make PNG give different priority in making Pareto improvement ordescent on F . When α is larger (the right figures), PNG will first move the model to Pareto set and start todecrease F after that.
