Figure  1:  Rate-distortion  performance  of  our  InstA  video  codecs.   InstA  (red)  leads  to  BD-ratesavings of between 17 % and 26 % over the corresponding base models (orange) and between 5 %and 44 % over H.265 (ffmpeg).
Figure 2: Trade-off between RD performance and encoder-side compute in the low-latency setting.
Figure 3: Temporal distribution of the RD loss of the global SSF18 model for the Big Buck Bunnyvideo. We use the 10 s windows with the lowest and highest loss as benchmarks, excluding the introand outro of Big Bunny.  These subsequences, which we call “BBB-E” and “BBB-H” for “easy tocompress” and “hard to compress”, are marked in orange and red.
Figure 4:  Bitrate our instance-adaptive SSF models (InstA-SSF, red) relative to the HM referenceimplementation of H.265 as a function of the quality in dB PSNR. We also show several neural(orange, blue, green) and traditional (grey) baselines.
Figure 5:  Rate-distortion performance of our instance-adaptive SSF models (InstA-SSF, red) com-pared to neural (orange) and traditional (grey) baselines on class C of the HEVC test sequences (left)and five Xiph.org test sequences (right).
Figure 6:  Rate-distortion performance of our instance-adaptive SSF models (InstA-SSF, red) com-pared to neural (orange) and traditional (grey) baselines on the “easy” (left) and “hard” (right) se-quences from the Big Buck Bunny video.
Figure 7:  Original and compressed details in frames 7395 (left) and 7276 (right) of the Big BuckBunny video (Xiph.org).  From top to bottom, we compare the original, compressed frames withthe H.264 and H.265 codecs in the ffmpeg (x264 / x265) implementation, the SSF18 baseline, andour proposed InstA-SSF18 method.  We use settings with comparable, low bitrates;  the achievedbitrates (over the 10s sequence) are given in the left panels. All codecs lose textural details, but ourInstA-SSF18 codec reduces the artifacts visible in the SSF18 reconstructions.
Figure 8: Left: Model size ablation study. We compare several global and instance-finetuned scale-space-flow models, showing the performance on the in to tree sequence (Xiph.org).  Right:  Effectof the GoP size at test time. We show rate-distortion curves of instance-adaptive and global SSF18models on the HEVC Xiph-5N dataset, comparing a fixed GoP size of 12 (solid lines) to an infiniteGoP size (dotted lines).
Figure 9:  Left:  Framerate ablation study.   We compare the SSF18 baseline (orange) and InstA-SSF18  (red)  on  the  original  video  at  120 fps  (solid)  and  on  the  temporally  subsampled  video  at30 fps (dot-dashed).  Instance-adaptive compression increases robustness to variation in framerate.
Figure 10:  Bitrate allocation for our InstA-SSF18 model.  We show the relative contribution to theoverall bitrate from quantized latents for the I-frames, P-frame flow, and P-frame residuals (differentshades of blue).  In red we show the relative contribution from the quantized model updates.  Left:on the UVG-1k dataset, which has a similar content to the training data. Right: on the two Big BuckBunny scenes, which differ substantially from the training data.  We find that InstA learns to spendmore bits on model updates in this case.
Figure 11:  Model bitrate allocation for our InstA-SSF18 (left) and InstA-SSF5 (right) model.  Weshow how the model rate is distributed across each autoencoder (columns) and submodule (rows).
