Figure 1: Cartoon of architecture: foreground, background, and joint classifiers.
Figure 2: Effect of object blurring on background and foreground features. PCA projection to2D-space is shown. Small and bright colored dots represent raw images while large and dark coloreddots represent blurred images. Left, entire subspace of the foreground features moved (up in thisexample) in presence of blur. Right, after application of blur background features remain within thestatistical subspace created by raw images. Each color represents a single image class. A filter withGauss kernel and σ = 5 was used to blur images.
Figure 3: Effect of Gaussian Blur on classification performance for MS COCO data. Panels a,c,dshow classification performance for different levels of blur (σ). ‘All’ refers to the 24 classes fromdifferent supercategories that remain after downsizing the dataset. ‘Dissimilar’ and ‘Similar’ areeight classes randomly selected from the 24 classes such that the supercategories are either distinct orthe same (see Methodology). b) Example of high Gaussian blur (σ = 45) on foreground pixels withinbounding box.
Figure 4: Effect of FGSM on MS COCO and CIFAR-10. a,c) FGSM attack on foreground classifierof ’All’ categories from MS COCO (a) and CIFAR-10 (c). indicates strength of attack. b,d) Averageabsolute value of the weights from the last layers of the foreground and background networks to thejoint classifier for MS COCO (b) and CIFAR-10 (d).
Figure 5: Regularization on the foreground weights of joint classifier. a)-b) Varying values of α onMS COCO Dissimilar and All categories are shown for the joint classifier in green. The range of αwas between 0.1 and 10. Darker green colors indicate higher levels of α. Examples for adversarialretraining were generated with an attack strength =0.3. c)-d) Average absolute value of foregroundand background weights as a function of α9Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022of the world, including the ability to predict the outcomes of current situations and one’s own actionsin that context. The sophistication and complexity of the brain processing to combine different typesof information streams to create internal model of the world is arguably the basis for "cognitivereserve", which is a significant factor in protection from age and disease related dementia, and so adeep understanding of how it is created and expressed is of high societal impact. Equally important,our study may provide insights into the algorithms that evolution has devised to make predictionsabout optimal behaviour based on the multimodal rich input from the world. This is a main issuein machine learning and using insight from biology will undoubtedly lead to advances in machinelearning algorithms.
