Figure 1: A visualization of how the 2D surface, here represented by a 2-torus, is embedded in alarger input space, R3. Suppose each point corresponds to an image of the face on this 2-torus. Wecan chart two curves: one straight line cutting across the 3D space and another curve that stays on thetorus. The images corresponding to the points on the torus will have a smoother variation in style andshape whereas there will be images corresponding to points on the straight line that do not belong tothe class of pictures of faces.
Figure 2: A circle is an example of a 1D manifold in a 2D Euclidean space. The effective number oflinear regions on the manifold, the upper half of the circle, are the number of linear regions on thearc from -π to π. In the diagram above, each color in the 2D space corresponds to a linear region.
Figure 3: The tractrix (a) and circle (b) are plotted in grey on the x-y plane, which are the 1D inputdata manifolds. The target function is in blue, on the z-axis, and periodic in nature.
Figure 4: Graph of number of linear regions fortractrix (blue) and sphere (orange). The shadedregions represent one standard deviation. Notethat the number of neurons is 26 and the numberof linear regions is comparable but different forboth the manifolds.
Figure 5: Graph of distance to linear regions fortractrix (blue) and sphere (orange). The distancesare normalized by the maximum distance on therange, for both tractrix and sphere. The shadedregions represent one standard deviation.
Figure 6: We observe that as the dimension nin isincreased, while keeping the manifold dimensionconstant, the number of linear regions remainsproportional to number of neurons (26).
Figure 7: We observe that as the dimension nin isincreased, while keeping the manifold dimensionconstant, the average distance varies very little.
Figure 9: We observe that the log density of num-ber of linear regions is lower on the manifold(blue) as compared to off the manifold (green).
Figure 8: The effects of changing the architectureon the number of linear regions. We observe thatthe value of CM effects the number of linear re-gions proportionally. The number of hidden unitsfor three layer networks are in the legend alongwith the data manifold.
Figure 10: The geodesic circle on S2 (blue region in (a)) does not have the same area as the flatcircle (b), both of radius . One can imagine cutting the blue top off the sphere’s surface and trying to"flatten" it. Such an effort will lead to failure, if the material of the sphere does not "stretch", sincethe geodesic ball, on S2 , cannot be mapped to a circle in R2 in a distance preserving manner. Thus,the area of the two blue regions in (a) and (b) vary. This deviation in the area spanned by the twospheres, despite their radii being the same, is proportional to the scalar curvature.
Figure 11: We illustrate how vectors project differently on tangent planes of two different manifolds:circle (a) and tractrix (b). In case of the tractrix the tangents (and the projection of vectors onto them)are on the inside of the tractrix whereas for the sphere the tangents are always on the outside of thesphere. Since the projections of vectors onto the tangent space are an essential aspect of our proof weend up with the term CM, which quantifies the “shrinking” of these vectors upon projection, in theinequalities for Theorems 2 and 3Proof. Define d to be the maximal dimension of linear pieces in S. Let x ∈ T (X ∩ M). Supposex ∈/ T(X ∩ M) for all k = n - m, ..., d - 1. Then the intersection of a geodesic ball of radiusaround s with S is a ball inside Sd ∩ M . Using the convexity of this ball, with respect to the manifoldM (Robbin et al., 2011), there exists a point y in Sd ∩ M such that the geodesic γ : [0, 1] → M withγ(0) = y and γ(1) = x is perpendicular to Sd ∩ M at y. Formally, TSd∩MM at y is perpendicularto γ(0) ∈ TM at y. Let Be(N*(S& ∩ M)) be the union of all the e balls along the fiber of thesubmanifold Sd ∩ M . Therefore, we haveVolm(Te(S ∩ M) ≤ VAm(BeZ(Sd ∩ M)) + Volm (Te(S≤d-i ∩ M)),	(11)where S≤d-1 := ∪dk-=10Sk. We also note thatVolm (Be(N* (Sd ∩ M)) = Volm+d-n(Sd ∩ M) Voln-d (Be ((M ∩ Sd)⊥)),where Be((M ∩ Sd)⊥) is the average volume of an e ball in the submanifold of M orthogonalto M ∩ Sd . This Volume depends on the aVerage scalar curVature, κ(M∩Sd)⊥ of the submanifold(M ∩ Sd)⊥. As shown by Wan (2016), for a fixed point x ∈ (M ∩ Sd)⊥voln-d(Be(x, (M ∩ Sd)⊥)) = ωn-den-d(1 - K(X)(M∩y e2 + O(e4)),
Figure 12: The test errors for the cases where data is sampled from the tractrix (blue) and the circle(green). We see that the tractrix converges slower but the magnitude of the errors remains comparableas training progresses across the two manifolds.
