Figure 1: Representation of differentspectra with different concentrations ofeigenvalues around the edges of the sup-port. The average-case rates for non-strongly problems are determined bythese concentrationsRegime	Worst-case	Average-CaseStrongly conv.	(1 - Θ(1∕√κ))t	(1 - Θ(1∕√κ))tSmooth conv.	1∕t2	1∕t2ξ+4Convex	1∕√t	1∕tα + 2Table 1: Comparison between function value worst-case and average-case convergence. κ is the condi-tion number in the smooth strongly convex case. Inthe smooth convex case ξ > -1 is the concentrationof eigenvalues around 0 (see Assumption 1) and inthe non-smooth case We consider dμ α λαe-λmin nf (x) := 1 (X — x?)>H(X — x?)0 .
Figure 4: Above: Empirical spectrum for the covariance matrix of the features. Below:Gradient norms throughout iterations. Left: CIFAR-10 Inception features Right: MNISTfeatures. Here We choose to compare gradient norms as the minimum function value is notknown. The properly tuned GCM achieves remarkable performance under these non-syntheticspectrum,s.
Figure 5: Rates for a synthetic problem, simulating the Marchenko Pastur distribution. Notethat both tunings of the GCM achieve performance in function value very close to the one ofConjugate Gradient, which is optimal for every draw of the problem.
Figure 6: Comparison between experiments run on synthetic Beta distribution and theoreticalasymptotic. Y-axis is the function value6	Conclusion and further workIn this paper, we’ve established that the assymptotic convergence of first order methodson quadratic problems in the convex regime depend on the concentration of the Hessian’seigenvalue near the edges of the spectrum’s support. We further contributed to the theoreticunderstanding of the Nesterov’s method performance and established the contrast betweenthe worst-case and average-case in the main regimes considered in Optimization.
Figure 7: Empirical vs Theoretical function-value performance for GCM(O?, β?) . Red linesare given by numerical integration, shades are minimum and maximum values under 10 runsand the blue line is the meanFigure 8: Empirical vs Theoretical function-value performance under Marchenko Pasturdistribution. Red lines are given by numerical integration,shades are minimum and maximumvalues under 10 runs and the blue line is the meanWe note that in the regimes where the empirical average performance doesn’t match thetheoretical one, we can still find samples of problems who do match. This and the muchlarger variance on the function-value, this discrepancy is due to numerical unstability inthese regimes.
Figure 8: Empirical vs Theoretical function-value performance under Marchenko Pasturdistribution. Red lines are given by numerical integration,shades are minimum and maximumvalues under 10 runs and the blue line is the meanWe note that in the regimes where the empirical average performance doesn’t match thetheoretical one, we can still find samples of problems who do match. This and the muchlarger variance on the function-value, this discrepancy is due to numerical unstability inthese regimes.
