Figure 2: We test STRIC time series intepretability on different datasets (columns). In each panel, we show bothtraining data and test data (see colors). First row: STRIC time series predictor (output of non-linear module). Secondrow: Trend components extracted by the interpretable blocks. Third row: Seasonal components extracted by theinterpretable blocks.
Figure 3: Automatic complexity selec-tion: Fading memory regularization pre-serves generalization gap as the memoryof the predictor np increases on NABTweets.
Figure 4: Anomaly score on the New York Times dataset. Ourmethod finds anomalies in a complex time series consisting of theBERT embedding of articles from the New York Times. Peaks inthe anomaly score correspond to historical events that sensiblychanged the content of the news cycle.
Figure 5: Change point: Cumulative sum (blue) ob-tained with our method in a synthetic example. We usethe cumulative sum of estimated likelihood ratios on datain which a change point is present at t = 60. We usenp = nf = 20 and kernel length scale=0.265450TimO68090Figure 6: Point anomaly: Cumulative sum (blue) ob-tained with our method in a synthetic example. We usethe cumulative sum of estimated likelihood ratios on datain which a point outlier is present at t = 60. We usenp = nf = 2 and kernel length scale=2.
Figure 6: Point anomaly: Cumulative sum (blue) ob-tained with our method in a synthetic example. We usethe cumulative sum of estimated likelihood ratios on datain which a point outlier is present at t = 60. We usenp = nf = 2 and kernel length scale=2.
Figure 7: Large np and nf : Cumulative sum (blue)obtained with our method in a synthetic example. Weuse the cumulative sum of estimated likelihood ratioson data which contain both change points (t = 60 andt = 200) and point outliers (t = 80 and t = 160). Weuse np = nf = 20 and kernel length scale=1.
Figure 8: Small np and nf : Cumulative sum (blue)obtained with our method in a synthetic example. Weuse the cumulative sum of estimated likelihood ratioson data which contain both change points (t = 60 andt = 200) and point outliers (t = 80 and t = 160). Weuse np = nf = 3 and kernel length scale=5.
Figure 9: Ablation studies on different datasets: Effects of interpretable blocks and fading regularization on model’sforecasting as the available window of past data increases (memory). Left Panel: Train error. Center Panel: Testerror. Right Panel: Generalization Gap. The test error of STRIC is uniformiy smaller than a standard TCN (withoutinterpretable blocks nor fading regularization). Adding interpretable blocks to a standard TCN improves generalizationfor fixed memory w.r.t. Standard TCN but get worse (overfitting occurs) as soon as the available past data horizonincrease. Fading regularization is effective: STRIC generalization GAP is almost constant w.r.t. past horizon.
Figure 10: We compare an off-the-shelf TCN against STRIC (time series predictor) on the Yahoo dataset A3 Bench-mark. Note the standard TCN overfits compared to STRIC: the standard TCN does not handle correctly the trendcomponent of the signal (First row). If we consider a time series without trend, the standard TCN model performsbetter but overfitting is still present. In particular the generalization gap (measured using squared reconstruction error)for the two models is: Standard TCN 0.3735 and STRIC 0.0135.
Figure 11: Zoom on the second row of panels in Figure 10. We show the interface between train and test data both ona plain TCN and on our STRIC predictor. A plain TCN overfits w.r.t. STRIC also when not trend is present.
Figure 12: A closer look at some of the change-points detected by STRIC. Left: Normalized anomaly score (blueline) and normalized frequency of the “Terrorism” descriptor (orange line) around the 9/11 attack. Right: Normalizedanomaly score (blue line) and normalized frequency of the “Earthquakes” descriptor (orange line) in the second half of2004 and beginning of 2005. The 2004 U.S. election causes an increase in the anomaly score, but the most significantchange-point occurs after the Indian Ocean tsunami.
