Figure 1: Trade-off between accuracy and privacy on an AlexNet model trained on CIFAR10. Eachcurve contains four points corresponding to ensembles comprising of 1, 2, 5, and 10 base models(from left to right). Using the single model trained for 90 epochs as a baseline, there are two choices:(1) making an ensemble of these models to achieve the highest accuracy possible but worse privacy(purple arrow), or (2) making an ensemble of less overfitted models (epoch #5) to achieve slightlylower accuracy of a single model but better privacy (brown arrow).
Figure 2: AlexNet on CIFAR10 (Class #2): Confidence distribution of a single model (top row)versus an ensemble of 10 models (bottom row). Jensen-Shannon divergence of the two distributionsare as follows: a) .2777, b) .1595, c) .2850, d) .3575, e) .2134, and f) .3792.
Figure 3: AlexNet model trained on CIFAR10. Left: The distribution of the number of times a sampleis correctly classified by 10 models used in the ensemble. The models often make less classificationmistake on train samples than test samples. Center: By separating samples based on how manytimes they have been correctly classified, we can observe that the confidence output of these samplesare negligible between train and test sets. Only when all samples are compared the distributiondifference is significant and that is the direct effect of the third factor, namely the level of correctagreement. Right: The effect of the three factors on the MI attack. As the gap between the level ofcorrect agreement of train and test widens (the blue lines), the MI attack on ensembles becomes moreeffective than a single model (green lines).
Figure 4: Membership inference attack results across all datasets/models. Each curve indicates anensemble of 1 (non-EL), 2, 5, and 10 models from left to right.
Figure 5: Effect of defense mechanisms on an AlexNet model trained on CIFAR10. The size of eachpoint indicates the relative value of its parameter, i.e., epoch, λ and .
Figure 6:	Target models’ accuracy and MI attacks’ AUC across all datasets and models.
Figure 7:	The first row contains correct agreement distribution for SVHN and CIFAR10 datasets.
Figure 8:	The first row contains correct agreement distribution for CIFAR100 and ImageNet datasets.
Figure 9:	The first row contains correct agreement distribution for Adult, Purchase, Texas, MNIST,and FMNIST datasets. The second row shows the average and standard deviation of distribution ofsamples based on the level of correct agreement.The third row shows the effect of the three factors onthe MI attack.
Figure 10:	Target models’ accuracy and MI attacks’ AUC across all datasets and models. Here, MIattack model uses aggregated logits instead of aggregated confidences.
Figure 11:	Target models’ accuracy and MI attacks’ AUC across all datasets and models usingweighted averaging ensemble networks.
Figure 12:	Target models’ accuracy and MI attacks’ AUC across all datasets and models usingsnapshot ensemble (Huang et al., 2017).
Figure 13:	Target models’ accuracy and MI attacks’ AUC across all datasets and models usingdiversified ensemble networks (Zhang et al., 2020).
