Figure 1:	Probabilistic program for a model for Milky Way and its two satellite galaxies. The obsstatements refer to the observations of (unnamed) random variables Vel1 and Vel2 .
Figure 2:	Probabilistic program for a simple clustering model on four data points.
Figure 3: Average training and test losses under three random seeds. The y-axes are log-scaledincreases in later epochs of Fig. 3c were due to only one or a few test programs out of 50.
Figure 4:	Comparisons of predicted and reference marginal posteriors recorded at different trainingsteps: at the initial step, after 1K epochs, and after 2K epochs.
Figure 5:	Average losses for generalisation to dependency graphs in ext1. The y-axes are log-scaled.
Figure 6:	Average losses for generalisation to dependency graphs in ext2. The y-axes are log-scaled.
Figure 8:	Marginal posteriors for the comparison, and contours of three HMC chains for pgm_19where the x-axis is for z0 and the y-axis z1.
Figure 9:	Milky Way example compiled to the probabilistic programming language used in the paper.
Figure 10:	Canonicalised dependency graphs for all 12 model types in ext1. The rows are for differentpositions of the nl variable, and the columns are for different dependency graphs: the model type(i,j) means one of the 12 model types in ext1 that corresponds to the i-th position of the nl variableand j -th dependency graph.
Figure 11:	Canonicalised dependency graphs for all five model types in ext2.
Figure 12:	Canonicalised dependency graphs for all three model types in the mulmod class.
Figure 13: Losses for hierd, cluster, milkyo, and rb. The g-axes are log-scaled. The surges in laterepochs of Fig. 13a, 13c and 13d were due to only a single or a few test programs out of 50.
Figure 14: Comparisons of reference and predicted marginal posteriors for 10 programs in the rb testset.
Figure 15: Average training and test losses for generalisation to the last (4th) dependency graph andto all three positions of the nl variable in ext1. The y-axes are log-scaled.
Figure 16: Average training and test losses for generalisation to the 4th and 5th dependency graphs inext2. The y-axes are log-scaled.
Figure 17: The program that is reported in ยง5.3, written in our probabilistic programming language.
