Figure 1: From fixed to data dependent smoothing. Using a fixed σ to smooth fθ for all inputs may undercertify inputs (results in smaller certification radii), which are far from the decision boundary e.g. x1, decreaseprediction confidence e.g. x2, or produce incorrect predictions e.g. x3. Thus, smoothing should vary per input(right figure) to alleviate the aforementioned issues.
Figure 2: Memory-based certification of the data dependent classifier. Given a memory of an input x1 witha certified region R1 and another input x2 with a certified region R2. Three scenarios could arise where R1and R2 intersect. Left: The certified regions intersect while both x1 and x2 share the same prediction. In thiscase, x2 along with its certified region are directly added to memory. Middle: x2 lies inside R1 with a differentprediction from x1 . In this case, x2 is predicted with the same prediction as x1 and added to memory alongwith the largest subset of R2 that is within R1. Right: x2 lies outside the R1 with a different prediction fromx1 In this case, x2 with its prediction are added to memory along with the largest certified region in R2 notintersecting with R1 .
Figure 3: Certified accuracy comparison against COHEN. For several σ values used in training (shown inthe legend), we compare Cohen against our two variants: Cohen-DS with data dependent certification onlyand Cohen-DS2, where data dependency is incorporated in both training and certification. We show CIFAR10and ImageNet results in the first and second rows, respectively. The last column shows the envelope across σ.
Figure 4: Certified accuracy comparison against SMOOTHADV. We compare SMOOTHADV againstSmoothAdv-DS and SmoothAdv-DS2. We show CIFAR10 and ImageNet results in the first and secondrows, respectively. The last column shows the envelope across σ.
Figure 5: Certified accuracy comparison against MACER. We compare MACER against MACER-DSand MACER-DS2 for several σ on CIFAR10. The last column shows the envelope.
Figure 6: Qualitative examples of estimated σX for different inputs. From left to right: the set of threeimages on the left: clean image, fixed σ = 0.5, and estimated σX = 0.368 that maximizes the certification radius.
Figure 7: Varying K in Al-gorithm 2. Top figure showscertification with σ0 = 0.12 onCIFAR10 and σ0 = 0.5 on Im-ageNet is shown at the bottom.
Figure 8: Certified accuracy per radius per σ comparison of SmoothAdv against greedy searchheuristic data dependent smoothing on CIFAR10. We observe that when the number of samplesn in Equation 4 the better the performance. Moreover, and despite that the total number of evaluationsof the data dependent certification matches our approach SmoothAdv-DS reported in Figure 4, theperformance is still far inferior to even data dependent certification as also evident from the lastenvelope figure.
Figure 10: Visualizing the extreme σ. We report the visual comparison between the constant σ0 andthe optimal attained σ* for Cohen Models (first three rows) and SmoothAdV (last three rows) both onImageNet.
Figure 11: `1 Certified accuracy comparison against Yang per radius per σ. We compare Yangagainst Yang-DS. We show CIFAR10 and ImageNet results in first and second rows, respectively.
