Figure 1: [Fig. 1a] Ignorability as a graphical model. From Richardson & Robins [2013], weexpress ignorability as a DAG. For brevity, we dropped the parentheses of Y (w), as well as itsaccepted “single world intervention path” from w to Y (w); [Figs. 1b to 1d] DGP for missingnessmechanisms. Shaded nodes indicate nodes that relate to missing variables, white nodes relate totreatment effects. In Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c we illustrate MCAR and M(N)AR, respectively. In Fig. 1dWe illustrate MCM. Unique to MCM is to allow for treatment to cause missingness (through X andZ), while also allowing for treatment to be caused by missingness (corresponding to X and Z ).
Figure 2: Arrows that are not included in MCM. Considering each possible direct arrow from,and to, the missingness variables ((Z and Z")，should result in 20 arrows, as there are five remainingvariables. Excluding the paths that are included, and the paths across missingness indicators, weare left with 10 paths that are seemingly missing from our definition. From Figs. 2a to 2d, we depicteach missing arrow in function of their related variable: X, then Y(W), W, and then X , and X.
Figure 3: Ignorability of the covariate-factors in MCM. Above DAG depictsMCM, where we have included Zand 2今	今&in the factors X and X, respectively. Be-• F Tl *cx ιr	1	1+111 -÷Vz^sides MCM, we have also included tX as anadditional node, meaning the imputed co-variate set stemming directly from 今X.
Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis on the amount of missingness: CATE. We report for two learnerstheir performance (PEHE, y-axis) as a function of the amount of missingness (x-axis). For eachsetting of the amount of missingness, we sample 50 different train and test sets to calculate anaverage and std (in line with what is reported in Table 2 and documented in our provided code-files).
Figure 5: Permutations on CIT. There are a total of 21 DAGs that respect Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). Fromthese DAGs, only one — Figure 5g — is acceptable. Add only the assumption that some elements inZ are informative, and some elements in Z are uninformative, and we automatically arrive at MCM.
Figure 6: Permutations on CIO. There are 21 possible DAGs that respect Eq. (3). None of themis acceptable as they, by definition, cannot include a direct edge from X to Y (w). Having a directedge between X and Y (w) encodes dependence, despite conditioning on X and Z. Note that wehave excluded edges going up from W or Y (w), in similar fashion to Richardson & Robins [2013].
