Figure 1: Top configurations of datasetsA, B, and C, where B, in orange (resp.
Figure 2: From basic to Metabu meta-features using Fused Gromov-Wasserstein. Basic (respectivelyMetabu) representations are depicted by circles (resp. squares). Target representations are depictedin the leftmost subplot. Neighbor datasets in the target space have same color in all subplots.
Figure 3: Empirical assessment of Metabu meta-features comparatively to the baselines meta-featuresets and uniform hyper-parameter sampling (better seen in color).
Figure 4: Metabu: Sensitivity ofNDCG@10 w.r.t. α and λ, compara-tively to AutoSkLearn (darker is better).
Figure 5: Comparative importance ofmeta-features for RandomForest (x-axis)and Adaboost (y-axis).
Figure 6: 2-D tSNE Visualisation of the OpenML datasets in basic representation space (legendedwith a ?’s) + their boostrapped augmentations. Only few dataset names are present for the sake ofreadability.
Figure 7: Metabu computational effort: average runtime of the meta-feature extraction (in blue)and Metabu training (in orange). The average training time of one hyper-parameter on Adaboost(green), Random Forest (red) and SVM (purple) pipelines are shown for comparison.
Figure 8: Comparative importance of meta-features for RandomForest Vs AutoSkLearn (left) andSVM (right). The specific AutoSkLearn meta-features are indicated as their name begins with acapital letter.
Figure 9: Pairwise comparison of METABU with baseline meta-features on Random Forest pipeline.
Figure 10: Pairwise comparison of METABU with baseline meta-features on Adaboost pipeline. Left:the average ranks. Right: the p-value assessing the statistical significance of the ranks accordingto the Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon test; the black horizontal line indicates the significance thresholdp-value=0.05.
Figure 11: Pairwise comparison of METABU with baseline meta-features on SVM pipeline. Left:the average ranks. Right: the p-value assessing the statistical significance of the ranks accordingto the Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon test; the black horizontal line indicates the significance thresholdp-value=0.05.
Figure 12: Performance curves on Random Forest.
Figure 13: Performance curves on Adaboost.
Figure 14: Performance curves on SVM.
