Figure 1: Panel (a) illustrates the trajectories of the pressureless potential flow corresponding to gen-eral FCMs , while panel (b) shows the trajectories of the volume-preserving pressureless potentialflow corresponding to ANMs. In panel (b), the trajectories have zero velocities on the Ex/X axisand move along straight lines that are parallel to each other when having the same values of X/Ex .
Figure 2: Performance on synthetic data generated from different ANMs with different sample sizes.
Figure 3: Synthetic data generated from ANMs with different (non)linear functions. From left toright, they are (1) Y = X + Ey; (2) Y = 0.1(2.5X)3 - 0.1X + Ey; (3) Y = sin(4X) + Ey; (4)Y = 0.5X3 — X + Ey if x < 0, and Y = 1 — 0.5X3 + X + Ey, otherwise, where X 〜U(-1,1)and Ey 〜U(0,1) are uniform distributions.
Figure 4: The influence of the batch size and the debiasing function on causal direction determina-tion in panel (a) and density estimation in panel (b). The synthetic data (of which the sample size is100) are generated from the linear ANM, Y = X + Ey, where X ~ U(-1,1) and Ey ~ U(0,1)are uniform distributions. In panels (a) and (b), the batch size is represented as the ratio of thesample size, e.g., 0.1 represents that the batch size is 0.1 × 100; the red triangular represents theexperiments with only using the variance-based divergence measure; the blue star represents usingthe the variance-based divergence measure and a linear debiasing function. The error bar in panel(b) represents standard deviation.
Figure 5: As a by-product, debiasing functions can be used for estimating the nonlinear functionof an ANM in Eqn (1). We optimize the parameters of a neural network representing a nonlineardebiasing function and the parameter of a uniform distribution representing the hypothesized noisedistribution. As for panel (a), the ground-true noise distribution is corresponding to θ = 1 and theestimated parameter θ is 1.066. As for panel (b), given a dataset {(xi, yi)}, yidebias = yi - gd(xi).
Figure 6: Robustness to prior misspecification: The performance of DIVOT with different hypothe-sized distributions of P(Ey; θ) on the datasets with uniform distribution noise Ey 〜U(0,1).
Figure 7: Comparison of the results of DIVOT (the first row) with the reported results in (Khe-makhem et al., 2021) (the second row). The figures in the second row are taken from the screen-shot of (Khemakhem et al., 2021). The noise (Z2 and Ey) distribution of the synthetic data isa Laplace distribution. CAREFL represents the causal autoregressive model (Khemakhem et al.,2021); CAREFL-NS represents the causal autoregressive model without scaling; RECI representsthe method, regression error causal inference (BIobaUm et al., 2018); ANM (Hoyer et al., 2008)uses Gaussian process while ANM-NN uses a neural network; linear LR is the linear likelihoodratio method (HyVarinen and Smith, 2013).
