Figure 1:	(a) Left: Neural operators perform a direct mapping from initial conditions to a solutionat time t. RIGHT: Autoregressive models on the other hand compute the solution at time t based onthe computed solution at a fixed time offset before. (b) Our autoregressive solver outputs multipletime slices on every call, to reduce number of solver calls and therefore error propagation speed.
Figure 2:	Different training strategies. Left: One-step training only predicts solutions one stepinto the future. MIDDLE: Unrolled training predicts N steps into the future. RIGHT: Adversarialtraining predicts N steps into the future, but only backprops on the last step.
Figure 3: Schematic sketch of our MP-PDE Solver.
Figure 4: Top: Exemplary 1D rollout of shock formation at different resolutions. The differentcolors represent PDE solutions at different timepoints. Both the small and the large shock are neatlycaptured and preserved even for low resolutions; boundary conditions are perfectly modeled. Bot-tom: Exemplary long 2D rollout of shock formations over 1000 timesteps. Different colors repre-sent PDE solutions at different space-time points.
Figure 5: Survival times at E1. Rollout for long trajectories of 8 s (left), pushforward (pf) ablation(right). The ablation compares survival times at resolutions nx = 100 (solid) and nx = 50 (dashed)against survival times using pushforward (no pf), no pushforward but putting Gaussian noise (σ =0.01), pushforward but without cutting the gradients (pf gradients).
Figure 6: 1D and 2D rollouts for the first analytical case setting the diffusion term ν = 0.005.
Figure 7: 1D and 2D rollouts for the second analytical case setting the diffusion term ν = 0.005.
Figure 8:	Exemplary wave propagation data for Dirichlet boundary conditions (left) and Neumannboundary conditions (right). Solutions are obtained on irregular grids using pseudospectral solvers.
Figure 9:	Exemplary 1D rollout of the Burgers’ equation at different resolutions. The differentcolors represent PDE solutions at different timepoints. Diffusion coefficients of η = 0.14 (top) andη = 0.08 (bottom) are compared for the same initial conditions. Lower diffusion coefficients resultin faster shock formation.
Figure 10:	Exemplary 1D rollout an unseen equation with different equation parameters. The differ-ent colors represent PDE solutions at different timepoints. Low α parameters (top) result in diffusionlike behavior. Large α parameters (middle, bottom) result in fast and large shock formations. Thewiggles arising due to the dispersive term γ. Numerical solvers cannot capture the wiggles at lowresolution (middle), MP-PDE solvers can reconstruct them much better (bottom).
Figure 11: Exemplary 2D rollouts for the wave equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions (top)and Neumann boundary conditions (bottom). The different colors for the Dirichlet boundary condi-tion comes from the fact that wave propagation changes the sign at each boundary.
Figure 12: Exemplary 2D smoke inflow simulation. Ground truth data (top) are compared to MP-PDE solvers (bottom). Simulations run for 100 timesteps corresponding to 100 seconds. The MP-PDE solver is able to capture the smoke inflow acccurately over the given time period.
Figure 13: Schematic sketch of our MP-PDE Solver, sketch taken from the main paper.
