Figure 1: The decoding algorithm of an arbitrary tensor decomposition represented by a ConvAC.
Figure 2: Inference of a TMM carried out by a ConvAC.
Figure 3: Classifier variant of TMM carried out by a ConvAC.
Figure 4: Blind classification with missing data. (a,c) Testing i.i.d. corruption with probability p foreach pixel. (b,d) Testing missing rectangles corruption with N missing rectangles, each of width andhight equal to W. (*) Accuracies are estimated from the plot of Goodfellow et al. (2013). (f) Dataimputation algorithms followed by a ConvNet. Raw results can be found in app. H.
Figure 5: We compare ConvNets trained on one distribution while tested on others. Training onrandomly (rand) chosen distributions were also examined. (a) Trained on i.i.d. corruption withprobability ptrain, while tested on i.i.d. corruption with probability ptest. (b) Train and tested on thesame (fixed) missing rectangles distribution, against ones trained on randomly chosen distributions.
Figure 6: The decoding algorithm of the CP decomposition represented by an Arithmetic Circuit.
Figure 7: The decoding algorithm of the HT decomposition represented by an Arithmetic Circuit.
Figure 8: Generated digits samples from the GHT-model trained on the MNIST dataset.
Figure 9: Visualization of the GHT-model. Each of the images above visualize a different layer of themodel and consists of several samples generated from latent variables at different spatial locationsconditioned on randomly selected channels. The leftmost image shows samples taken from the 5thlayer which consists of just a single latent variable with 512 channels. The center image showssamples taken from the 4th layer, which consists of 2 × 2 grid of latent variables with 256 channelseach. The image is divided to 4 quadrants, each contains samples taken from the respective latentvariable at that position. The rightmost image shows samples from the 3rd layer, which consistsof 4 × 4 grid of latent variables with 128 channels, and the image is similarly spatial divided intodifferent areas matching the latent variables of the layer.
