Figure 1: Comparing image captioning outputs decoded by BS (top) and our method, Diverse Beam Search(middle) - We notice that BS captions are near-duPlicates With similar shared paths in the search tree andminor variations in the end. In contrast, DBS captions are significantly diverse and similar to the variability inhuman-generated ground truth captions (bottom).
Figure 2: Diverse beam search operates left-to-right through time and top to bottom through groups. Diversitybetween groups is combined with joint log probabilities, allowing continuations to be found efficiently. Theresulting outputs are more diverse than for standard approaches.
Figure 3:	Qualitative results on Visual Question Generation. DBS generates questions that are non-generic andbelong to different question types.
Figure 4:	Effect of increasing the number of groups G. The beams that belong to the same group are coloredsimilarly. Recall that diversity is only enforced across groups such that G = 1 corresponds to classical BS.
Figure 5:	Fig. 5a shows the results of a grid search of the diversity strength (λ) parameter of DBS on thevalidation split of PASCAL 50S dataset. We observe that it is robust for a wide range of values. Fig. 5bcompares the performance of multiple forms for the diversity function (∆). While naive diversity performs thebest, other forms are comparable while being better than BS.
Figure 6:	Screen-shot of the interface used to perform human studies15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017Difficulty Score : 2.8308Difficulty Score : 2.9287Difficulty Score : 2.8999Beam SearchA man riding a motorcycle on a dirt roadA man riding a motorcycle on a beachA man riding a motorcycle on the side of a roadA man riding a bike on a dirt roadA man riding a motorcycle on the side of the roadA man riding a motorcycle on the side of a beachDiverse Beam SearchA man riding a motorcycle on a beachA man riding a bike on a dirt roadA man riding a bike on a dirt roadA man on a motorcycle is flying a kiteA person on a skateboard riding on the side of a roadA person On a bicycle with a helmet on on the ground
Figure 7:	For images With low difficulty score, BS captions are preferred to DBS - as show in the first figure.
Figure 8:	For images with a high difficulty score, captions produced by DBS are preferred to BS. Interestingcaptions are colored in blue for readability.
Figure 9: As the number of beams increases, all decoding methods tend to achieve about the same oracleaccuracy. However, diverse decoding techniques like DBS utilize the beam budget efficiently achieving higheroracle accuracies at much lower beam budgets.
