Figure 1: Architecture difference between the CNN (A) and the scattering network (B) withoutdepiction of the computation of the scattering coefficients which are obtained after averaging overeach obtained representation.
Figure 2: Filter-Bank in Fourier with 4 wavelets per octave on 4 octaves. The sparsity is of 0.94%with = 0.01Table 1: Sparsity in percentage of the Morlet Filter-Bank in Fourier for different signal sizes andrealistic parameters (J = 9, Q = 16).
Figure 3: Nonzero elements are shown in black, after application of the filters and the nonlinearityoperatorP. The x-axis corresponds to the frequency ω and the y-axis to the filter index. This follows,，	，.	.	,,.	,，•	, ，	")ʌthe geometric progression of the wavelets since each line corresponds to ψ(i)x.
Figure 4: Left: Figure showing the increase in nonzero coefficients is linear with respect to the inputsize. Right: Figure showing the increase in sparsity in our representations for the two layers. Theincrease is logarithmic with respect to the input size.
Figure 5: Needed computation time to perform the transform for the first X(1) [x] and second X(2) [x]layers. The need computation time is more than 16 times smaller than the known Scatnet toolbox im-plemented in C (github.com/RandallBalestriero/CIGAL_GUI) of O(N log(N)) timecomplexity even when dealing with Fourier domain inputs. This shows the advantage of our ap-proach which here is implemented in Python only.
Figure 6: Classification MAP given two set of parameters for the second scattering network layer.
Figure 7: Demonstration of the P computation in the Fourier domain. Top: input after applicationof a specific filter. Middle: Extracted window with nonzero elements and optimal padding greaterthan the minimum size up to the next power of 2. Bottom: Result of the convolution done throughanother Fourier transform and the convolution theorem, the kept coefficients are from 0 to M sincethey are followed by zeros and the complex conjugate of these coefficients leading to optimal results.
Figure 8: Some possible φ filters in the Fourier domain corresponding to Gaussian filtering withbandwidth in the physical domain inversely proportional to the σ in the Fourier domain withoutrenormalization.
Figure 9: nonzero elements present after application of the filters and the nonlinearity operator P onthis representation for a sparse input.
Figure 10: Example 1: transform Xλ(1) [x]. In this case, clear frequency modulations appear for onlyone source and high SNR. The noise is contracted to 0 through the nonlinearity.
Figure 11: Example 2: transform Xλ(1) [x]. In this case, the source presents multiple kinds of chirps,and frequency modulated patterns. Some harmonics are detected yet it is clear that aggregation ofthe time dimension with this representation only will aggregate the different patterns leading to poorsignal characterization leading to the need of Xλ(2),λ [x].
Figure 12: Example 3: transform Xλ(1) [x]. In this case only transients are present and almost notfrequency modulation appear on the features. This kind of signal will be well captured with onelayer only.
Figure 13: We present here the features extracted form the 3 examples presented in Fig. 10,11,12.
