Figure 1: VISUALIZATION VIA LOTS ON LENET. This figure shows perturbed images generated usingLOTS by modifying the internal representations of an MNIST image xo, shown in (a), captured at variouslayers in a trained LeNet model. Each subfigure shows the formed image xo± and the perturbation, while thesub-captions show the name of the layer l followed by an index in parenthesis indicating its position in thenetwork architecture, the classification of xo± , the PASS score between origin and the perturbed image, andthe L2 and L∞ norms of the perturbation. (b)-(c) show x+ images having magnified internal representationswith perturbations scaled such that L∞ = 128. Note that as pixels are constrained to [0, 255], actual L∞norms can be smaller (d)-(e) contain reduced internal representations X- formed by perturbations having thesmallest magnitude that changes the class label.
Figure 2: VISUALIZATION VIA LOTS ON VGG FACE. This figure shows perturbed images generatedusing LOTS by modifying the internal representations of a face image xo shown in (a), captured at variouslayers of the trained VGG Face model. Each subfigure shows a distorted image xo± and its perturbation. Thesub-captions list the name of the layer l followed by an index in parenthesis indicating its position in the networkarchitecture, the classification of xo±, the PASS score between origin and the distorted image, and the L2 andL∞ norms of the perturbation. (b)-(f) contain reduced internal representations X- with perturbations havingthe sufficient minimal magnitudes to change the classification. (g) serves purely visualization purposes as itscorresponding perturbation is scaled to L∞ = 64. (h)-(i) show x+ images that magnify the captured internalrepresentations with sufficiently large perturbations that result in altered classifications by the model.
Figure 3: ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATIONS VIA LOTS ON LENET. This figure shows adversarialimages and their corresponding perturbations of handwritten digits generated with LOTS using the origin from(a) and target from (b). Each subfigure shows the targeted adversarial image xto and the perturbation, while thesub-captions show the name of layer l followed by an index in parenthesis indicating its position in the networkarchitecture, the classification of xto, the PASS score between origin and the adversarial image, and the L2 andL∞ norms of the perturbation.
Figure 4: ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATIONS VIA LOTS ON VGG FACE. This figure shows adversarialimages and their corresponding perturbations of face images generated with LOTS using the origin from (a)and target from (b). Each subfigure shows the targeted adversarial image xto and the perturbation, while thesub-captions show the name of the layer l followed by an index in parenthesis indicating its position in thenetwork architecture, the classification of xto, the PASS score between origin and the adversarial example, andthe L2 and L∞ norms of the perturbation.
