Figure 1: Invariance and equivariance accuracy measurements for ILSVRC. Each plot compares aCNN trained with a particular transformation (blue line for equivariance, green for invariance) tothe baseline model (red for equivariance, black for invariance) trained with no transformations. Thex-axis ranges over different parameters for each type of transformation. Each point represents theerror of the Mg learned on that particular parameterization of the transformation.
Figure 2: Equivariance and Invariance measurements of CNNs trained with various parameterranges. Larger training ranges yields greater robustness for a wider range of transforms.
Figure 3: (a) shows how often transforms of the same type are K-nearest neighbors. It revealsa strong bias towards networks trained with the same transformation having more similar repre-sentations. Heatmaps (b) and (c) show average distances between representations induced by thetransforms. Lighter squares indicate greater distance, while darker squares indicate the transformsare closer together. Diagonal entries are distance 0, but were set to white for visualization purposes.
Figure 4: Example instances of the RVL-CDIP dataset.
Figure 5: Example Elastic Deformations transforms for which we measured invariance and equiv-ariance in Figure 7c.
Figure 6: Example Perspective transforms for which we measured invariance and equivariance inFigure 7f. (a) is the original untransformed images, while (b-d) are ordered in increasing magnitudeof transformation.
Figure 7: Invariance and equivariance accuracy measurements for RVL-CDIP (similar to Figure 1).
Figure 8: Equivariance and Invariance measurements of CNNs for some transforms. The first twocolumns are for RVL-CDIP. The last two columns are for ILSVRC.
Figure 9: Equivariance and Invariance measurements of of CNNs for some transforms. The first twocolumns are for RVL-CDIP. The last two columns are for ILSVRC.
Figure 10: Cross dataset measurements of invariance/equivariance reveal that these properties do ex-tend to data domains beside the one used to train the CNN, though the invariance is slightly weaker.
Figure 11: T-SNE visualization of the pairwise distance matrix for (a) RVL-CDIP and (b) ILSVRC.
Figure 12: Absolute Differences in the one-way distances (Eq. 9) for all pairs of CNNs using LL2distance. Row/Col labels are abbreviations for the transforms used to train the CNN. For context,a typical LL2 representation distance (Eq. 4) is roughly 0.50 for RVL-CDIP and 1.00 for ILSVRC.
