Figure 1: Causal strength Wji inferred by our method with watching a trained CNN playing Break-out. The (j, i) element denotes the inferred causal strength from j to i.
Figure 2: Causal strength inferred by (a) mutual information (b) transfer entropy (c) linear Granger(d) causal influencegames2 (Bellemare et al. (2013), implementation details see Appendix F). Fig 1 shows the inferredWji matrix, with the (j, i)th element denoting the inferred causal strength from j to i. We seethat there is a prominent causal direction from the ball’s y position to the reward, which correctlysummarizes that the ball’s y position has a large influence on the reward. Additionally, the otherdiscovered causal directions with causal strength greater than 1 include: brick → reward, ball-y →brick, reward → paddle, ball-x → action, ball-y → action. The former two correctly summarizecausal chains from ball-y → brick → reward, the latter two show that the ball’s x and y positionsalso have big causal influences on the trained agent’s action: in order that the ball does not fall tothe bottom, the agent has to position itself at the right position depending on the x and y positionsof the ball.
Figure 3: (a) Causal strength Wji inferred by our method with the heart-rate vs. breath-rate dataset,averaged over 50 initializations of fθ . The shaded areas in this figure and Fig. 4 are the 95%confidence interval. (b) Upper: the filtered causality index vs. varying width of Gaussian kernel σ(Marinazzo et al. (2008a)); lower: transfer entropy vs. r, the length scale (Schreiber (2000)); (c)The causality index for breath→heart (lower) and heart→breath (upper) in Ancona et al. (2004).
Figure 4: Causal strength inferred by our method with the EEG datasets, for different maximum timehorizon K, averaged over 50 initializations of fθ. (Left) Causal strength Wji for the EEG signal fora normal rat. (Right) Causal strength Wji of EEG signal from the same rat, after brain lesion.
Figure 5:	(a) MMSE(3) (ρ) and (b) Rx,x(3) [ρ] in section B.3, for Σx = 1, Ωx = 2, λ = 1.
Figure 6:	(a) RX,x(3) [ρ] for (a) λ = 0.01, (b) λ = 0.5, (c) λ = 2 and (d) λ = 10 in section B.3, forΣx = 1, Ωx = 2.
Figure 7: Causal indices for the rat EEG dataset with previous methods. (a) By Ancona et al. (2004).
