Figure 1: Generated objectshape providing the contain-ability and supportability func-tionalities.
Figure 2: The features that describe (2a) wooden beams and (2b) flat roads can be combined, toobtain an object design that possesses both float-ability and traverse-ability: (2c) a pontoon bridge.
Figure 3: Examples of original voxelised objects (top) and their reconstructions (bottom) generatedby the VAE neural network. Objects taken from the ModelNet dataset (Wu et al., 2015).
Figure 4: Functional forms extracted for (a) tables, (b) chairs and (c) monitors. Objects taken fromthe ModelNet dataset (Wu et al., 2015). Visualiser: viewvox (Min, 2004).
Figure 5: Object combination results for bathtubs and toilets functional forms, using a toiletfunctional form base combined with a bathtub functional form (top), and a bathtub functionalform base combined with a toilet functional form (bottom), both of which can be interpreted asa bidet. A gradual transformation is displayed (base functional form combined with top-50% totop-95% of the second functional form). From left to right, the combination looks less like a toilet(top) / bathtub (bottom) and more like a bidet.
Figure 6: Combining features of objects providing respectively wash-ability and support-ability intoa novel object form, providing both functionalities. (6d) shows the two objects from the trainingdataset that are closest to our generated object, in terms of similarity of the activation values of theone-before-last layer of the decoder.
Figure 7: Affordance detection results using the AffordanceNet (Do et al., 2018).
Figure 8: The generated bathtub-workdesk object in (8a) perspective view and (8b) top-down view.
Figure 9: The architectures of the (a) encoder and (b) decoder.
Figure 10: Schematics of the building blocks of the (a) encoder layer and (b) decoder layer.
Figure 11: Impact of the different parameters used when combining shape encodings. Left to right:amount of total variables used (ranging from 0 to 1, in steps of 0.2), ranked by their importancescore. The left-most column has only void, as no variables are used for combinations. The right-mostcolumn corresponds to interpolations between the functional forms of a toilet and a bathtub. Top tobottom: weight of KL divergence with the encoding of a void volume (from 0 to 1, in steps of 0.2);the weight of KL divergence with a Gaussian prior is (1 - KL divergence with void).
