Figure 1: Two-dimensional example of optimal transport problem (4)-(7) with N = 8. Circles •represent real-data points in D and triangles ▲ represent fake-data points in F. Arrows betweencircles • and filled triangles ▲ show the optimal transport plan M* with c(χ, y) = ||x - y∣∣2, whichis an identity matrix. Arrows between open △ and filled ▲ triangles show small perturbations of F,which do not change M*.
Figure 2:	Training behaviors of the methods experimented. (a) Critic loss versus the number ofgenerator iterations, and (b) EWD versus the number of generator iterations in four trials of WGAN-SN. (c) EWD versus the number of generator iterations, averaged over 5 trials, in WGAN, WGAN-GP, WGAN-TS, and the proposed method.
Figure 3:	Typical behavior of WGAN-TS in training on the MNIST dataset with and without weightscaling. (a) EWD. (b) Scaling factor, defined as β = sup{ 1, sup{ "(7：)-D(G(Zj)), ||yi - G(Zj)|| >||yi -G(zj )||0}} in Liu et al. (2018, Section 4.1). If β ≤ 0, the critic satisfies the 1-Lipschitz constraint. (c)Regression error of the critic.
Figure 4: Examples of fake-data images generated by the generators trained on the MNIST datasetwith the four methods compared.
Figure 5: Generator distribution in successful trial with the proposed method on the 8-Gaussian toydataset. Eight large circles Q represent positions of GauSSian components of real-data distribution,and filled triangles ▲ are fake-data points. Snapshots in (a) initial stage, (b) intermediate stage, and(c) late stage of training are shown.
Figure 6: Behaviors of updating in training on the 8-Gaussian toy dataset with (a) the proposedmethod, (b) WGAN-GP, and (c) WGAN-TS. Eight large circles Q represent positions of Gaussiancomponents of real-data distribution. Filled circles • are real-data points, filled triangles ▲ are pre-updated fake-data points, and open triangles △ are post-updated fake-data points. Solid and dottedarrows indicate optimal gradient directions of fake-data points and directions of their actual updates,respectively. Left, center, and right panels are at iterations 10, 20, and 30, respectively.
