Figure 1: The overall sharing mechanisms of MRN, two variants of DMTRL (for the setting of CNN)and our TRMTL w.r.t. two tasks. The shared portion is depicted in yellow. The circles, squares andthin rectangles represent tensor cores, matrices and vectors, respectively. MRN: original weights aretotally shared at the lower layers and the relatedness between tasks at the top layers is modeled bytensor normal priors. DMTRL (TT or Tucker): all layer-wise weights must be equal-sized so as tobe stacked and decomposed into factors. For each task, almost all the factors are shard at each layerexcept the very last 1D vector. Such pattern of sharing is identical at all layers. TRMTL: layer-wiseweights are separately encoded into TR-formats for different tasks, and a subset of latent cores areselected to be tied across two tasks. The portions of sharing can be different from layer to layer.
Figure 2: The demonstration of four types generalizations from DMTRL-TT to our TRMTL.
Figure 3: The diagrams of a 4th-order tensor and its TT-format and TR-format.
Figure 4: The averaged accuracy of two tasks involved with 50 samples. The training samples for‘task A vs task B’ are ‘1800 vs 50’ and ‘50 vs 1800’.
Figure 5: Performance comparison of MRN, DMTRL-Tucker, DMTRL-TT and our TRMTL-4431on CIFAR-10 with different fractions of training data. Top row: 100% data for two of the threetasks, and show the accuracy for the other one task (in solid lines) as well as the averaged accuracyof all three tasks (in dotted lines). Bottom row: 100% data for one of the three tasks, and show theaccuracies for the other two tasks (in dashed and solid lines).
Figure 6: The results of accuracy changes of tasks A, B, D and E, when the faction of the data fortraining for task C is increased from 10% to 90%. ‘+’ corresponds to the results after the samplesaugmentation of task C. Left (Right): 10% (50%) data for training for task A, B, D and E.
Figure 7: Features visualization of 2000 CIFAR-10 images. Tasks A, B and C correspond to threecategories in CIFAR-10, i.e., non-animals, animals with bird and frog excluded, bird and frog. Toprow: DMTRL features. Bottom row: our features.
