Figure 1: Illustration of the example from Section 2.3. The Wasserstein proximal penalizes param-eter steps in proportion to the mass being transported, which results in updates pointing towardsthe minimum of the loss function. The Euclidean proximal penalizes all parameters equally, whichresults in updates naively orthogonal to the level sets of the loss function.
Figure 2: The effect of using RWP regularization, on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The experiments areaveraged over 5 runs. The bold lines are the average, and the enveloping lines are the minimumand maximum. From the three graphs, we see that using the easy-to-implement RWP regularizationimproves speed as measured by wallclock time, and it also is able to achieve a lower FID.
Figure 3: The effect of Relaxed Figure 4: An experiment demon- Figure 5: The effect of theWasserstein Proximal (RWP) strating the effect of perform- Semi-Backward Euler (SBE)regularization on Standard ing 10 generator iterations per method, on the CIFAR-10GANs, on the CelebA dataset. outer-iteration with and without dataset. As we observe, theThe experiment was averaged RWP, where an outer-iteration training is comparable to theover 5 runs. The bold lines are is a single loop of: a num- standard way of training usingthe average, and the envelop- ber of discriminator iterations, the WGAN-GP loss. Theing lines are the minium and then a number of generator it- experiment was averaged overmaximum. Here we see RWP erations. This experiment goes 5 runs. The bold lines is theregularization improves the to 1,000,000 outer-iterations to average, and the envelopingspeed (via wallclock time), and show long-term behavior. With lines are the minimum andachieves a lower FID. We note RWP regularization we obtain maximum.
Figure 6: A sample of images generated by RWP regularization on Standard GANs, on CelebA.
Figure 7: A sample of images generated by RWP regularization on WGAN-GP, on CIFAR-10.
Figure 8: A latent space walk for a network with RWP regularization on Standard GANs, on CelebA.
Figure 9: A latent space walk for a network with RWP regularization on WGAN-GP, on CIFAR-10.
