Figure 1: VAE consists of an encoder (Enc) and an decoder (Dec). As shown in (a), auxiliarymodelling task is an additional VAE with a shared latent variable. The auxiliary VAE performsmodelling task on a transformed version of the data. In (b), we show original SVHN data and theirshuffled version (Top) and the reconstructions from the VAE (Bottom).
Figure 2: Inspecting local and global latent variables. We show that by varying the local latentvariable Zl the background colours and brightness of the generative images change (see (a) and(c)). The global variable Zg dictates the digit identity and style for SVHN and global structure forCIFAR10 while keeping the background colour and brightness unchanging (see (b) and (d)). β = 20was used to produce the figures.
Figure 3: Classifier accuracy of the generated test samples. The classifier has the accuracy of 95%on SVHN test set. The accuracy is reduced to 86% when the test data is auto-encoded through themodel. By changing the zg , the identity of the digits are completely changed. However, this is notthe case when zl is changed.
Figure 4: Digit identity clustering assignments on the SVHN test set. The y-axis indicates 10 groundtruth labels and the x-axis indicates 30 predicting clusters (re-arranged). The darker the box the moredata points assigned to the cluster. Each ground truth identity is represented by approximately threeclusters. Interestingly, digit ”1” uses 7 clusters which is much more than other digit classes. Thisis likely to be the results of distractors in images with digit ”1” present. There is a clear confusionbetween digit ”5” and ”6” which are sharing some of the clusters.
Figure 5:	Clustering preference. The figures show generative samples from two clusters y thatrepresent images with two digits (left) and three digits (right). The local code zl is fixed for eachcluster and, therefore, the samples have the same colour scheme. The global codes zg are randomlysampled which changes the style and identity of the digits.
Figure 6:	Generative images from different clusters y. Each sub-figure shows that each clustermainly represents an identity of the digits. However, two digit identities might share the samecluster (e.g. ”5, 6” and ”0, 9”). In addition to the digit identity, the VAE also disentangles imagesinto groups which either have darker digits than the background or lighter digits than the background.
