Figure 1: Reorganizing feature attribution methods as Exclusive Feature Selection (EFS) and In-clusive Feature Selection (IFS). See the references for the details of each method: Grad (Simonyanet al., 2013), Grad×Input (Shrikumar et al., 2016), IntGrad (Sundararajan et al., 2017), Smooth-Grad (Smilkov et al., 2017; Hooker et al., 2018), LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg &Lee, 2017), GuidedBP (Springenberg et al., 2014), ExciteBP (Zhang et al., 2016), LRP (Bach et al.,2015), DeepTaylor (Montavon et al., 2017), DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017), Occlusion (Zeiler& Fergus, 2014), Detector (Zhou et al., 2014), Anchor (Ribeiro et al., 2018), Meaningful Perturba-tion (Fong & Vedaldi, 2017), and PertMap (Hara et al., 2018; Ikeno & Hara, 2018)Answer to Q1: We introduce two formalizations, namely EFS and IFS (Section 2). We formal-ize the feature attribution problem as feature selection problem, because the goal of feature attribu-tion is to identify the relevant features to the model’s decision. Here, we point out that there aretwo possible approaches for characterizing the relevance of the features. In the first approach, EFS,we exclude some features from the model, and if the model’s decision changes by the exclusion,we infer the excluded features are relevant since they have certain impacts to the decision. In thesecond approach, IFS, we include some features to the model, and if the model’s decision remainsunchanged after the inclusion, we infer the included features are relevant since they are essential tothe decision.
Figure 2: The idea of EFS: Within the trade-off between intensity Er [fc(xS,r)] and the number ofcorrupted features |S |, find S that minimizes the intensity and its size. The red pixels indicate thecorrupted features S. The corrupted features S in the second image is optimal in this curve.
Figure 3: The idea of IFS: Within the trade-off between intensity Er [fc (xS,r)] and the number ofcorrupted features |S |, find S that maximizes the intensity and its size. The red pixels indicate thecorrupted features S . The corrupted features S in the fourth image is optimal in this curve.
Figure 4: Average EFS-Curve and IFS-Curve.
Figure 5: Attributions on VGG16: The red colored pixels are found to be strongly relevant with eachmethod.
Figure 6: Average EFS-Curve and IFS-Curve evaluated with uniform noises.
Figure 7: Average EFS-Curve and IFS-Curve evaluated with random images.
Figure 8: Example Heatmaps: The red colored pixels are foundmethod.
Figure 9: Example Heatmaps: The red colored pixels are foundmethod.
Figure 11: Example Heatmaps: The red colored pixels are found to be strongly relevant with eachmethod.
Figure 12: Example Heatmaps: The red colored pixels are found to be strongly relevant with eachmethod.
