Figure 1: Adversarial vulnerability approximated by different attack-types for 10 trained networks asa function of (a) the `1 gradient regularization-strength e used to train the nets and (b) the averagegradient-norm. These curves confirm that the first-order expansion term in (2) is a crucial componentof adversarial vulnerability.
Figure 2: Average norm ExkdxLk of the loss-gradients, adversarial vulnerability and accuracy(before attack) of various networks trained with different adversarial regularization methods andregularization strengths . Each point represents a trained network, and each curve a training-method.
Figure 3: ExkdxLkI (right) increase linearly with the square-root of the image-resolution d, as predicted by Corollary 6.
Figure 4: Evolution over training epochs of the average '1-gradient-norms on the training (left) andtest set (right). There is a clear discrepancy: on the training set, the gradient norms decrease (after aninitialization phase) and are dimension-independent; on the test set, they increase and scale like √d.
Figure 5: As predicted by Theorem 7, average-pooling layers make networks more robust to ad-versarial examples, contrary to strided (and max-pooling) ones. But the vulnerability with average-poolings remains higher than anticipated.
Figure 6: Similar experiment than Fig 3, but with downsam-pled ImageNet images, rather than upsampled CIFAR-10images. Same conclusion: after usual training, vulnerabilityand average ∣∣∂xLkι grow like √d.
Figure 7:	Same as Figure 1 but using an '2 threshold instead of a '∞ one. Now the '2-based methods(deep-fool, and single-step and iterative '2-attacks) seem more effective than the '∞ ones.
Figure 8:	Same as Figure 2, but with an '2- perturbation-threshold (instead of '∞) and deep-foolattacks (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016) instead of iterative '∞ ones. All curves look essentially thesame than in Fig. 2.
Figure 9:	Same as Figure 6 but with an '2 perturbation-threshold (instead of an '∞ one) and usingdeep-fool (instead of iterative-'∞) attacks to approximate adversarial vulnerability.
