Figure 1: Demonstrations of (a) the JWAE scheme and (b) the interpolation based V2VS method.
Figure 2: Comparisons of different methods for photo-segmentation translation on Cityscapesdataset. We first synthesize a video of street scene and then translate it to the segmentation domain(Top), and vice versa for the mapping from segmentation to street scene (Bottom).
Figure 3: Comparison of different methods for season translation on SYNTHIA dataset. Top row:The synthesized video in the winter domain. Rows 2-4: The corresponding translated video in thedomains of the other three seasons, i.e., spring, summer and fall.
Figure 4: Comparisons of different methods for season winter→spring translation on SYNTHIAdataset. The figure shows all frames of a video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 5: Comparisons of different methods for season winter→summer translation on SYNTHIAdataset. The figure shows all frames of a video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 6: Comparisons of different methods for season winter→fall translation on SYNTHIAdataset. The figure shows all frames of a video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 7: Comparisons of different methods for photo→segmentation translation on Cityscapesdataset. The figure shows all frames of a video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 8: Comparisons of different methods for segmentation→photo translation on Cityscapesdataset. The figure shows all frames of a video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 9: Comparisons of different methods for photo→segmentation translation on Cityscapesdataset. The figure shows all frames of another video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 10:	Comparisons of different methods for segmentation→photo translation on Cityscapesdataset. The figure shows all frames of another video synthesized and translated by these mehtods.
Figure 11:	Comparisons of different methods on Cityscapes (left) and SYNTHIA (right).
