Figure 1: (a) Generating deformed images: To randomly deform an image we: (i) Start with a fixedevenly spaced grid of control points (here 4x4 control points) and then choose a random source foreach control point within a neighborhood of the point; (ii) we then smooth the resulting vector fieldusing thin plate interpolation; (iii) vector field overlayed on original image: the value in the finalresult at the tip of an arrow is computed using bilinear interpolation of values in a neighbourhoodaround the tail of the arrow in the original image; (iv) the final result. (b) Examples of deformedImageNet images. left: original images, right: deformed images. While the images have changedsignificantly, for example under the L2 metric, they would likely be given the same label by a human.
Figure 2: Pooling confers stability to deformation at initialization but the stability changes sig-nificantly over the course of training and converges to a similar stability regardless of whetherpooling is used. (a) At initialization, networks with max-pooling are less sensitive to deformation.
Figure 3: Tasks requiring more deformation invariance lead to smoother filters. (a) We generatesynthetic tasks where each class is based on a single MNIST image and within each class examplesare generated by applying a random deformation of strength C to this class image. The image onthe left is generated using deformations of strength 3. The columns for the image on the right aregenerated using deformations of strengths 1, 2, 3, 4 respectively. (b) After training, filters fromnetworks trained on tasks where stronger deformations are used are smoother. Dotted black lineindicates average value at initialization.
Figure 4: Training leads to smoother filters. (a) and (b) After training, the filters are significantlysmoother and different architectures converge to similar levels of filter smoothness. (c) When trainingon random labels the smoothness of filters depends largely on the chosen downsampling layer.
Figure 5: (a) Initialization with smoother random filters lead to deformation stability. Wesmooth filters by convolving with a Gaussian filter with standard-deviation σ and then measurethe sensitivity to deformation. As we increase the smoothness of the filters by increasing σ, therepresentations became less sensitive to deformation. Darker lines are for smoother random filters.
Figure 6: Changes in pose can be well approximated using the deformations we consider.
Figure 7: Translation can be well approximated using the deformations we consider.
