Figure 1: Example illustrating how our Temporal Gaussian Mixture layer is computed. Multiple (M)temporal Gaussian distributions are learned, and they are combined with the learned soft attentionweights to form the C temporal convolution filters. L is the temporal length of the filter.
Figure 2: Illustration of a TGM layer with grouped convolution. This layer learns a setofC Gaussianmixtures that are convolved with the input channels.
Figure 3: Illustration of a TGM layer with channel combination. The kernels are applied to eachinput channel, Cin , and a 1x1 convolution is applied to combine the Cin input channels for eachoutput channel, Cout .
Figure 4: An overview of an example video CNN model with two TGM layers. It is able to handlevideos with any length, because of its fully convolutional design.
Figure 5: Illustration of the temporal regions classified as various basketball activities from a bas-ketball game video in MultiTHUMOS. Our TGM layers greatly improve performance.
Figure 6: Illustration of several learned TGM kernels. On MultiTHUMOS, it learns to focus onshorter intervals to capture shorter events. On Charades, the Gaussians have a larger σ value, result-ing in filters that attend to longer temporal durations.
Figure 7: (a-c) Different forms of 1-D temporal convolutions which take a D × T input and producesa C × T output based on C number of D × L kernels: (a) the standard 1-D convolution, (b) usingGaussian mixtures for 1-D convolution while sharing Gaussian mixtures across input channels, and(c) using D different Gaussian mixtures for 1-D convolution. (d) Our TGM layer in its simplest form(i.e., 1-layer case) applying the 1 × L temporal kernel in a 2-D convolutional fashion, maintainingboth time and feature axis.
Figure 8: A temporal convolutional layer with channel combination similar to Fig. 3. The differenceis that this layer does not learn Gaussian mixtures, but unconstrained 1-D temporal kernels.
Figure 9: Examples of several of the activities in the MLB-YouTube dataset: (a) Pitch, (b) Hit, (c)Bunt, (d) Hit by pitch, (e) No activity. This shows the difficulty of this dataset, as the differencebetween hit and bunt, swing and no swing are very small.
