Figure 1: Top-1 success rates of IGSM (T = 20,α = 5,ε = 15) and FGSM(ε = 15) attacks against vgg19bnfor various models. The annotated value is the success rate transferring to the vgg_19. Here, the models ofvgg-style have been removed to exclude the influence of architecture similarity. For the same color, the differentpoints corresponds networks of different depths.
Figure 2: Illustration of howthe non-smoothness of the losssurface hurts the transferabil-ity. For any a, let a denote theunit vector O-.
Figure 3: (a) Cosine similarity between the gradients of source and target models. (b) Visualization of decisionboundaries. The origin corresponds to the clean image shown in Figure 10 of Appendix. The same color denotesthe small label, and the gray color corresponds to the ground truth label.
Figure 4: (a) Success rates (%) for sg-FGSM attacks with different m. Here we use σ = 15. (b) The sensitivityof the hyper parameter σ.
Figure 5: Destruction rates of adversarial examples for various methods. For smoothed gradient attacks, wechoose m = 20, σ = 15. The distortion ε = 15.
Figure 6: Visualization of gradients. The leftmost is the examined image. The second corresponds to the originalgradient, whereas the remaining two images corresponds to the smoothed gradients estimated by different m.
Figure 7: Average success rates over three ensembles for different step size α and number of iteration k. Thethree ensembles are the same with those in Table 4. Distortion ε = 20.
Figure 8: Top-1 success rates of IGSM (T = 20, α = 5, ε = 15) and FGSM(ε = 15) attacks against resnet152for various models. The annotated value is the success rate transferring to the resnet152. Here, the modelsof resnet-style have been removed to exclude the influence of architecture similarity. For the same color, thedifferent points corresponds networks of different widths.
Figure 9: Visualization of decision boundaries. The source model is resnet34, and 9 target models are considered.
Figure 10: The image used to perform decision boundary visualization. Its ID in ILSVRC2012validation set is 26, with ground truth label being table lamp.
