Figure 1: CoVariance matrices of PGD, FGSM and DeePFool perturbations as Wen as CIFAR10training set (for comparison). The short-range structure of the perturbations is clearly visible. It isalso apparent that the first two attack methods yield perturbations with almost identical covariancestructure. We are showing a center-crop for better visibility (25% trimmed on each side). Forcomparison the matrices were rescaled such that their maximum element has an absolute value of one.
Figure 2: PGD covariance functions: (Left) intra-channel covariance functions, measuring correla-tions between identical color channels, (the coloring in the plot matches the corresponding channel),(right) inter-channel covariance functions, measuring correlations between distinct color channels.
Figure 3: (Left) Accuracy of different models as a function of the LRC attack decay length ζ ∈ [1, 16]at fixed = 0.3 (averaged over five runs). The plot clearly demonstrates the superiority of using astructured covariance matrix in the SGR regularizer. (Right) LRC perturbed samples with increasingdecay lengths ζ ∈ [1, 2, 4, 8, 12] (two examples per decay length). The top row shows original testset images, the middle row shows adversarially perturbed samples, while the bottom row shows theadversarial perturbations rescaled to fit the full range of rgb values (their actual range and hencesaliency is smaller). The footer indicates the classifier predictions on adversarial input.
Figure 4: Long Range Correlated Noise. Classification accuracy of different models as a function ofthe attack strength for an LRC attack with a fixed decay length ζ = 8 on CIFAR10. The SGR/GNhyper-parameters are reported in Sec. 4.3. See Fig. 3 for a plot of the accuracy of different models asa function of the LRC attack decay length ζ ∈ [1, 16] at fixed = 0.3Figure 5: Long-range structured covariance matrices corresponding to the covariance functionsdefined in Sec. 4.3 for increasing decay lengths ζ ∈ [1, 2, 4, 8], as well as covariance matrix ofCIFAR10 training set (for comparison). As an alternative to the covariance function representationdescribed in Sec. 3.3, we can also leverage the block-structure of the full covariance matrix to obtaina sparse representation: as can be seen in the figures, different equally distant pairs of rows are oftennearly identically correlated. Hence it is enough to estimate the covariance between a few pairs ofrows rm and rn > rm (until the correlations become sufficiently small). This amounts to for instanceestimating the covariance matrix by a diagonal and a few off-diagonal blocks.
Figure 5: Long-range structured covariance matrices corresponding to the covariance functionsdefined in Sec. 4.3 for increasing decay lengths ζ ∈ [1, 2, 4, 8], as well as covariance matrix ofCIFAR10 training set (for comparison). As an alternative to the covariance function representationdescribed in Sec. 3.3, we can also leverage the block-structure of the full covariance matrix to obtaina sparse representation: as can be seen in the figures, different equally distant pairs of rows are oftennearly identically correlated. Hence it is enough to estimate the covariance between a few pairs ofrows rm and rn > rm (until the correlations become sufficiently small). This amounts to for instanceestimating the covariance matrix by a diagonal and a few off-diagonal blocks.
Figure 6: Softmax activations along a linear trajectory between a clean sample and plus/minus fivetimes the = 4 PGD adversarial perturbation for an SGR regularized classifier (top) and a cleanclassifier (bottom) on CIFAR10.
