Figure 1: Illustration of ISS-GAN framework’s steganographiC experimental performanCe on theworld-renowned art paintings. (a) Original version of The Starry Night painted by Van Gogh. (b)Stego version of The Starry Night. (C) Emblem of Netherland as the embedded seCret image. (e)Original version of The rose arches painted by Monet. (f) Stego version of The rose arches. (g)Emblem of France as the embedded seCret image. (d,h) Residual differenCe between original andstego versions. (We inverse the Color to emphasize the differenCe.)(h)2 Related WorkState-of-the-art steganography approaChes Can be Categorized into three types.
Figure 2: Framework and workflow chart of ISS-GANTo combine the purpose of steganography, steganalysis and GAN model, we propose novel ISS-GAN framework. ISS-GAN also consists of the steganography generative and steganalysis discrim-inative model. The purpose of steganography generative model is to generate stego image whichis aligned with the original cover image, and attempts to confuse steganalysis discriminative mod-el. While the purpose of the discriminative model is to distinguish generated stego image from thecover image. When ISS-GAN achieves Nash Equilibrium, i.e., the generative model can generatestego image which exactly aligns with the character and distribution of cover image. And at thesame time, the discriminative model returns the classification probability 0.5 for each pair of stegoand cover image. This also aligns with the evaluation criterion of steganography and steganalysis.
Figure 3: Stego images SOI generation performance of ISS-GAN. Row 1: Original cover images:Lena, Airplane, Baboon, Fruits and Peppers, Row 2: Corresponding generated stego images, Row3: Residual difference between original and stego images. (We inverse the color to emphasize thedifference. Because the differences are inconspicuous. Please magnify to see the differences whichmainly on the marginal parts of objects.)Table 1: Evaluation metrics of generated stego images SOIMetriCS/Images	Lena	AirPIane	Baboon	FrUitS	PePPerSPSNR		33.0170	33.0065	29.1163	33.9085	30.5124SSIM	0.9390	09589	09335	09510	09034Let’s have a further analysis of the obtained results. If we magnify Figure 3 to see the residualdifferences, we can find they are mainly on the marginal and textural parts of objects. For example,the hat of Lena, the edges of F16 plane, the skin and whiskers of baboon, the profile of fruits andpeppers, etc. It means ISS-GAN tends to hide the secret info into marginal parts of the object in6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019original cover images. In information theory, textures and edges represent the high frequency partsof the image, while smooth regions represent the low frequency parts of the image. If we changethe low frequency parts, it is easy to be detected by steganalysis method. So many state-of-the-art steganography algorithms transform the cover image from spatial domain to frequency domain.
Figure 4: Extracted secret images if stego images are attacked by noise. Column 1: Multiplicativenoise, Column 2: Salt and pepper noise, Column 3: Gaussian white noise, Column 4: Poisson noise.
Figure 5: Extracted secret image of trolleybus after adding certain attacks. Row 1: Gaussian whitenoise, Row 2: Poisson noise, Row 3: Salt and pepper noise, Row 4: Speckle noise, Row 5: JPEGcompression. (Results of separate Salt noise and Pepper noise are in Appendix.) Column 1-7 areESTI obtained by LSB-TLH, WOW, HUGO, S-UNIWARD, ISGAN, SSGAN and proposed ISS-GANalgorithms.
Figure 6: Extracted secret image of ICLR conference headline after adding certain attacks. Row 1:Gaussian white noise, Row 2: Poisson noise, Row 3: Salt and pepper noise, Row 4: Speckle noise,Row 5: JPEG compression. (Results of separate Salt noise and Pepper noise are in Appendix.)Column 1-7 are ESTI obtained by LSB-TLH, WOW, HUGO, S-UNIWARD, ISGAN, SSGAN andproposed ISS-GAN algorithms.
Figure 7: PSNR and SSIM metrics for generated stego images SOI versus cover images CI withdifferent pixel-ratio and attacks.
Figure 8: Extracted secret images if stego images are attacked by noise. Column 1: Multiplicativenoise, Column 2: Salt and pepper noise, Column 3: Gaussian white noise, Column 4: Poisson noise.
Figure 9: Extracted secret image of trolleybus after adding certain attacks. Row 1: Salt noise, Row2: Pepper noise. Column 1-7 are ESTI obtained by LSB-TLH, WOW, HUGO, S-UNIWARD, ISGAN,SSGAN and proposed ISS-GAN algorithms.
Figure 10: Extracted secret image of ICLR conference headline after adding certain attacks. Row1: Salt noise, Row 2: Pepper noise. Column 1-7 are ESTI obtained by LSB-TLH, WOW, HUGO,S-UNIWARD, ISGAN, SSGAN and proposed ISS-GAN algorithms.
