Figure 1: Multi-relational graph and its completion.
Figure 2: Multiple hierarchical relations in asingle tree. As this example shows, it is possi-ble that multiple relations are given by multi-ple dissimilarity criteria in a single structure.
Figure 3: Tangent space and ex-ponential map. The exponentialmap moves the point p ∈ Malong a geodesic (the white line)that tangent to V ∈ Tp M.
Figure 4: Parallel vector field in a sphere. The left figure showsa parallel vector field in a plane. In a sphere, there is no parallelvector field. Even if a vector field seems parallel from one view(center), it turns out to be not parallel (right)TransE (Alternative form)/ Head satellite SM of entityYzTail satellite Sir Ofentityi♦ Attraction pointt →; is likely to have relation(when sj is close to SJI)A.................Vi → ; is Unlikelyto have relation(When * is distant from Sa).
Figure 5: Difference between TransE and Riemannian TransE. In these examples, the number |V |of entities is three (1, 2, 3) and the number |R| of relations is two (red and orange), with triples (1,orange, 2) and (1, red, 3). Hence, these models learn that the orange head satellite of Entity 1 isclose to the orange tail satellite of Entity 2 and the red head satellite of Entity 1 is close to the redtail satellite of Entity 3. In addition, the distance of the other pair of satellites should be long inthe representation learned by each method. The figure on the left shows the original formulation ofTransE, where the satellites are given by vector addition. In other words, the satellites are given by amove towards a point at infinity from the planet. The center figure shows an alternative formulationof TransE, which is equivalent to the original TransE. Here, the tail satellites are launched and thehead satellites are fixed in the red relation. In Riemannian TransE in the figure on the right, thevector additions are replaced by a move towards a (finite) point.
Figure 6: Relation of the sign for `. If ` is positive (e.g. the orange relation), the relation runs fromlow (e.g. Entity 2 and 3) to high hierarchy (e.g. Entity 1), and vice versa (e.g. the red relation).
Figure 7: Parallel transforms in a sphere S2 . This figure shows two ways to transform vector v ∈TpS2 to TrS2 . We denote the parallel transform from along segment pq by Πqp : TpS2 → TqS2 .
