Figure 1: (a) A sample of smudged images on which labels were randomized.(b) The DAC abstainson most of the smudged images on the test set (abstention recall) (c) Almost all of the abstainedimages were those that were smudged (abstention precision) (d) Risk-coverage curves for baselineDNNs, DAC and post-DAC DNN for both softmax-based thresholds and SGR. First-pass trainingwith the DAC improves performance for both softmax and SGR methods.
Figure 2: (a) All monkey images in the trainset had their labels randomized (b) The DAC abstainson about 80% of the monkey images (abstention precision). (c) Among images that were abstained,most of the images were those of monkeys (abstention precision). (d) Distribution of baselineDNN predictions over monkey images in the test set indicating learning difficulty on this class (e)Distribution of winning softmax scores of the baseline DNN on the monkey images (f) Distributionof baseline DNN softmax scores > 0.9. Most of these confident predictions are non-monkeys (g)Comparison against various abstention methods (softmax and SGR) on all the test images (h) Samecomparison, but only on those images on which the DAC abstained. The DAC has a small butconsistent advantage in both cases. All figures are computed on the test set.
Figure 3: Filter visualizations for the DAC. When presented with a smudged image (a,c), the smudgecompletely dominates the feature saliency map (b,d) that cause the DAC to abstain. However for thesame image without a smudge (e), the class features become much more salient (f) resulting in acorrect prediction. For abstention on monkeys (g), the monkey features are picked up correctly (h),which leads to abstentionassociated with the monkey class that result in abstention(Figures 3g, 3h), visually confirming ourhypothesis in Section 3.3 that the DAC has effectively mapped monkey features to the abstentionlabel. Further experiments illustrating the abstention ability of the DAC in the presence of structurednoise are described in Section B of the Appendix.
Figure 4: DAC behavior forthe random smudging experi-ments for different fixed a'sindicating the tendency for all-or-nothing abstention (top) ifα is kept constant.
Figure 5: Images and filter visualizations illustrating the usage of DAC as an out-of-category detector.
Figure 6: Results on blurred-image experiment with noisy labels (a)20% of the images are blurred inthe train set, and their labels randomized (b) Validation accuracy for baseline vs DAC (non-abstained)(c)Abstention behavior for the DAC during training (d) Distribution of predictions on the blurredvalidation images for the DAC. We also observed (not shown) that for the baseline DNN, the accuracyon the blurred images in the validation set is no better than random.
