Figure 1: Cramer-Wold distance of two setsobtained as the mean squared L2 -distanceof their smoothed projections on all one-dimensional lines.
Figure 2: CWAE achieves perceptually similar results to WAE-MMD. Results of WAE-MMD(first row) and CWAE (second row) on CelebA data set of original WAE-MMD architecture. Left:Interpolations between two examples from the test distribution (left to right, in each row). Middle:Reconstruction of examples from the test distribution; odd rows correspond to the real test points.
Figure 3: Latent distribution of CWAE is close to the normal distribution. Each subfigure presentspoints sampled from two-dimensional latent spaces, AE, VAE, WAE, SWAE, and CWAE (left toright). All trained on the MNIST data set.
Figure 4: Metrics assessing normality of the model output distributions, during training: FID score,Mardia’s skewness and kurtosis of models WAE, SWAE and CWAE, on the CelebA test set. Thevalues given are mean from 5 experiments of differently initialised models together with standarddeviation confidence intervals. Low standard deviation of CWAE indicates its stability during learning.
Figure 5: Comparison of φD value (red line) with the approximation given by equation 12 (greenline) in the case of dimensions D = 2, 5, 20. Observe that for D = 20, the functions practicallycoincide.
Figure 6: Comparison of mean batch learning time (times are in log-scale) for different algorithms inseconds, all for the same architecture like the one in Tolstikhin et al. (2017) and all requiring similarnumber of epochs to train the full model. This times may differ for computer architectures withmore/less memory on a GPU card.
Figure 7: CelebA trained CWAE, WAE, and SWAE models with FID score, kurtosis and skewness,as well as CW-, WAE-, and SWAE-distances. Results are given both related to epochs and learningtime. All values are mean from 5 models trained for each architecture. Confidence intervals representthe standard deviation. Optimum kurtosis is marked by a dash line.
Figure 8: CIFAR10 trained CWAE, WAE, and SWAE models with FID score, kurtosis and skewness,as well as CW-, WAE-, and SWAE-distances. Results are given both related to epochs and learningtime. All values are mean from 5 models trained for each architecture. Confidence intervals representthe standard deviation. Optimum kurtosis is marked by a dash line.
Figure 9: Results of VAE, WAE-MMD, SWAE, and CWAE models trained onthe WAE architecture from Tolstikhin et al. (2017). In “test reconstructions” oTest reconstructionRandom samplerows correspond tothe real test points.
