Figure 1: VarNet architecture. The input x,x are in X, the input space and the metadata m isin M, the metadata space. The latent template code z* lies in Z*, the template space, while thelatent variable z lies in Z the latent space. The variable u is sampled from a zero-mean unit-variance normal distribution. Finally, the features φ(x, m) are in Ψ, the attribute space. The NeuralAutoregressive Flows (NAF) Huang et al. (2018) are represented using two arrows, one pointing tothe center of the other one; this denotes the fact that the actual parameters of first neural networkare obtained by feeding meta-parameters into a second neural network. The discriminator D acts onZ* × Ψ.
Figure 2:	Different sampling schemes. Fig. 2a: sampling from the dataset distribution using Eq. (18)using the 1Free+1FixedLabel attribute function. Fig. 2b: sampling elements with fixed attribute ψusing Eq. (19) with the 1Free+1FixedLabel attribute function. Fig. 2c: same as Fig. 2b but using the1Free attribute function. In Fig 2c and 2b, two sets of samples (top and bottom) corresponding totwo different values of ψ are shown.
Figure 3:	Visualization of the spanned space of variations using two different inputs (shown in thelast row). The attribute function 1Free+1FixedLabel is used. The values of αi for the free attributes(see Eq. (12)) increase linearly from 0 to 1.
Figure 4: Space of variations usingthe 1Free+1FreeLabel attribute func-tion. The free label-dependent attributevaries along the y-axis while the free(global) attribute varies along the x-axis.
Figure 5: Sampling scheme Eq. (21) using the1Free+1Label attribute function. Each row showssamples obtained by sampling z* ~ q*(.∣x) fora fixed random feature ψ. The original input isshown on the last line.
Figure 6: Figures 6a, 6b and 6c display the space of variations using the 2Free attribute functionfor two different input. Fig. 6d display the space of variations using the 1Free attribute function.
Figure 7: Variation spaces (shown in Z) of a VarNet trained using the 1Free attribute function, fordifferent Z*. We plotted {z = fψ(z*)} for ψ = αιvι where αι ∈ [0.0,0.05,..., 0.95,1.0] andrandom z*. Visualized using a 3D PCA in Z.
