Figure 1: (a) Causal diagram for kidney stones. (b) The model for deconfounding reinforcementlearning. Solid nodes denote observed variables and open nodes represent unobserved variables.
Figure 2: Reconstruction and counterfactual reasoning on the confounding Pendulum dataset. Toprow: results from the model without the confounder u (Morin); Second row: results from the modelwith the confounder u (Mdecon). The last two rows are the zoom of samples selected in the samepositions from the top row (dashed boxes for Morin) and the second row (solid boxes for Mdecon),respectively.
Figure 3: Comparison of vanilla (Orin-AC) and deconfounding (Decon_AC) Actor-Critic methodson the confounding Pendulum dataset. (a) total reward over 1500 episodes in the training phase;(b) total reward over 100 episodes in the testing phase; (c) Probability of optimal action over 100episodes, corresponding to (b).
Figure 4: Example of a proxy variable. t is a treatment, e.g., medication; y is an outcome, e.g.,mortality; Z is an unobserved confounder, e.g., socio-economic status; and X is noisy views on thehidden confounder Z, say income in the last year and place of residence.
Figure 5: The component of 4-tuple (zt, xt, at, rt+1).
Figure 6: The component of 4-tuple (u, xt, at, rt+1).
Figure 7: Reconstruction and counterfactual reasoning on the confounding MNIST dataset. Toprow: results from the model without the confounder u (Morin); Bottom row: results from the modelwith the confounder u (Mdecon). The sequences boxed in yellow have non-consecutive squares.
Figure 8: (a) Plot of 128 data points sampling from the posterior approximate of u on the confound-ing MNIST dataset; (b) Plot of 128 data points sampling from the posterior approximate of u on theconfounding CartPole dataset;Hyperparameter	ValueDeconfounding Model	learning rate	0.0001dimension of zt	50dimension of xt	784dimension of at	1dimension of rt	1dimension of u	2dimension of LSTM unit	100batch size	128number of steps	5number of epoch	400DecOnfOunding AC	number of episodes	^^1500-number of time steps in each episode	200capacity of the replay memory	100,000batch size	128
