Figure 1: Overview of the way in which the Evo-NAS agent creates a child trial, given a parenttrial. The colored blocks represent actions that the agent has to perform (e.g. architectural andhyperparameter choices). Each action is reused from the parent trial with probability p, or sampledfrom the distribution learned by the controller neural-network with probability 1 - p.
Figure 2: Comparison between Reinforce and Priority-Queue-Training (PQT) on “Learn to count”synthetic task, for both Neural (Left) and Evo-NAS (Right) agents. The plot shows the best rewardattained (Y-axis) after a given number of trials (X-axis). Each experiment was ran 20 times, and theshaded area represents 70% confidence interval.
Figure 3: Comparison of different agents on “Learn to count” synthetic task. On the Y-axis, theplots show the moving average of the reward over 50 trials (Left) and the best reward attained so far(Right). Each experiment was ran 20 times, and the shaded area represents 70% confidence interval.
Figure 4: Results of the experiments on 7 text classification tasks. Evo-NAS and Neural agents usePQT with learning rate 0.0001 and entropy penalty 0.1. Their controllers are trained to maximizelog likelihood of the top 5 trials. Each experiment was ran 10 times. Each run was bound to 2h ofruntime in which 30 trials were trained in parallel. For each run, we have selected the model thatobtained the best ROC-AUC on the validation set (the best reward). These best models were thenevaluated by computing the ROC-AUC on the holdout testset. The empty circles in the plot representthe test ROC-AUC achieved by each of the 10 best models. The filled circles represent the means ofthe empty circles. We superpose ±1 standard deviation bars.
Figure 5: Reward moving average for different agents. The average is computed over a window of 50consecutive trials. We ran 3 replicas for each experiment. The shaded area represents minimum andmaximum value of the rolling average across the runs.
Figure 6: Correlation of validation accuracy with test accuracy (Left) and validation ROC-AUC withtest ROC-AUC (Right). The correlation is higher for ROC-AUC. For plotting the correlations, weFigure 7: Number of trials performed for the experiments from Figure 4. The empty circles representthe number of trials perfomed in each of the 10 experiments. The filled circles represent the means ofthe empty circles. We superpose ±1 standard deviation bars.
Figure 7: Number of trials performed for the experiments from Figure 4. The empty circles representthe number of trials perfomed in each of the 10 experiments. The filled circles represent the means ofthe empty circles. We superpose ±1 standard deviation bars.
