Figure 1: Probability Layer Intuition. Figure 1a and Figure 1b give example of similar classes andFigure 1c shows how probability layer and softmax layer take effect together.
Figure 2:	Strong class skew (p = 1) with differ-ent number of classes50	60	70	80	90	100Percentage of Majority (%)Figure 3:	Weak class skew (p < 1) with variouspercentage p(％) Augnuu<diminishes slowly as the number of classes increases. Even if there are 40 classes, a benefit over 10%could still be observed.
Figure 3:	Weak class skew (p < 1) with variouspercentage p(％) Augnuu<diminishes slowly as the number of classes increases. Even if there are 40 classes, a benefit over 10%could still be observed.
Figure 4: High confidence, high accuracyFigure 5: Detection of class skewsHigh confidence leads to high accuracy, i.e., the model maintains a higher accuracy on images thatthe model provides a high predicted probability. Specifically, for DenseNet with a top-1 accuracyof 73% on all CIFAR-100 testing images, the accuracy increases to 83% when we set the thresholdω to be 75%. When we increase further the threshold ω to be 99%, the accuracy would increasedramatically to 95.01%. Thus when a model has strong confidence in its prediction, we should betterbelieve in the model instead of rescaling, i.e., modifying the prediction based on environment throughprobability layer. In fact, the prediction may indicate the switching of class skew if several imagesare predicted with high confidence to be a class outside the current class skew.
Figure 5: Detection of class skewsHigh confidence leads to high accuracy, i.e., the model maintains a higher accuracy on images thatthe model provides a high predicted probability. Specifically, for DenseNet with a top-1 accuracyof 73% on all CIFAR-100 testing images, the accuracy increases to 83% when we set the thresholdω to be 75%. When we increase further the threshold ω to be 99%, the accuracy would increasedramatically to 95.01%. Thus when a model has strong confidence in its prediction, we should betterbelieve in the model instead of rescaling, i.e., modifying the prediction based on environment throughprobability layer. In fact, the prediction may indicate the switching of class skew if several imagesare predicted with high confidence to be a class outside the current class skew.
