Figure 1: The pipeline of adversarial mesh generation by meshAdv.
Figure 2: Benign images (diagonal) and corresponding adversarial examples generated by meshAdvon PASCAL3D+ renderings tested on Inception-v3. Adversarial targeted are shown on the top. Weshow both perturbations on (a) shape and (b) texture.
Figure 3: Heatmap visualization of vertex flows on Inception-v3.
Figure 4: 3D adversarial meshes generated by meshAdv in a synthetic scene. (a) represents thebenign rendered image and (b)-(e) represent the rendered images from “adversarial object” by ma-nipulating the shape or texture. We use the format “adversarial target | adversarial type” to denotethe object aiming to hide and the type of perturbation.
Figure 5: 3D adversarial meshes generated by meshAdv in an outdoor simulated scene. (a) and (c)are the corresponding rendered images with “pristine object” as control experiment, while (b) and(d) contain “adversarial meshes” by manipulating the shape. We use the format “ S/Sadv | target” todenote the benign/adversarial 3D meshes and the target to hide from the detector.
Figure 6: 3D adversarial mesh for classification under unknown environment. We estimate theviewpoint and lighting parameters with the differentiable renderer, and then use the estimated envi-ronment to perform targeted attack on classification using the differentiable renderer, and transfer tothe non-differentiable renderer.
Figure 7: 3D adversarial meshes against object detectors in photorealistic scenes. we use “S |renderer" to denote the whether the added object is adversarially optimized and the rendering enginethat we aim to transfer the perturbation to attack against.
Figure 8: Benign images and corresponding adversarial examples generated by meshAdv on PAS-CAL3D+ on DenseNet. (a) presents the “adversarial meshes” by manipulating shape while (b) bymanipulating texture change.
Figure 9: Target attack transferability to mitsuba. (i,j) represents the attack success rate of the“adversarial meshes” labeled as groundtruth i and attacked as target j on Mitsuba rendering.
