Figure 1: Loss surface f (x) “ }G(x) — G(x*)}, x* = [1,0], of an expansive network G withReLu activation functions with k “ 2 nodes in the input layer and n2 “ 300 and n3 “ 784 nodes inthe hidden and output layers, respectively, with random Gaussian weights in each layer. The surfacehas a critical point near —x*, a global minimum at x*, and a local maximum at 0.
Figure 3: Mean square error in the image domain, MSE(Gpx),x*), and in the latent representa-tion, MSEpx, x*), as a function of the dimension of the latent representation, k, with σ2 = 0.25 (leftpanel), and the noise variance, σ2 with k “ 50 (middle panel). As suggested by the theory pertain-ing to decoders with random weights, if k is sufficiently small, and thus the network is sufficientlyexpansive, the denoising rate is proportional to σ2 k{n. Right panel: Denoising of handwritten dig-its based on a learned decoder with k “ 10 and k “ 20, along with the least-squares fit as dottedlines. The learned decoder with k “ 20 has more parameters and thus represents the images with asmaller error; therefore the MSE at σ “ 0 is smaller. However, the denoising rate for the decoderwith k “ 20, which is the slope of the curve is larger as well, as suggested by our theory.
Figure 4: Logic of the proof: Starting at an arbitrary point, Algorithm 1 moves away from 0,at least till its iterates are outside the gray ring, as 0 is a local maximum; and once an iterate xileaves the gray ring around 0, all subsequent iterates will never be in the white circle around 0 again(See Lemma 8). Then the algorithm might move towards —ρdχ*, but once it enters the dashed ballaround — ρdχ*, it enters a region where the function value is strictly larger than that of the dashedball around x*, by Lemma 10. Thus steps 3-5 of the algorithm will ensure that the next iterateXi is in the dashed ball around x*. From there, the iterates will move into the region S', sinceoutside of S' Y Se the algorithm chooses a descent direction in each step (see the argument aroundequation (16)). The region S' is covered by a ball of radius r, by Lemma 9, determined by the noiseand .
