Figure 1: In the typical RL model (left), an agent has only one single motivation and maximizesone scalar reward. In MMBM (right), an agent or player has multiple motives and the goal is tooptimize the combination of different rewards based on the agent’s own value structure.
Figure 2: Spider maps to represent player reward mechanism or value structure. Top-left: thedirection y of different motivations for the entire WoW player community; top-right: differentvalue structures between the players at higher level (≥ 50) and the players at lower level (≤ 49);bottom-left: different value structures between the players in different classes Warrior, Hunter, andPriest; bottom-right: comparison of different value structure of the players who are in guild andthose who are not in a guildTable 2:	Accuracy and error of different approachesApproach	Accuracy (%)	ILE (%)Proposed approach (c = 0.5)	85.5	13.2Proposed approach (c = 0)	84.5	11.0Linear scalarization Ng et al. (2000)	48.6	21.0Max entropy scalarizationZiebart et al.	54.9	22.1(2008)		Large margin scalarizationParameswaran	59.2	19.6& Weinberger (2010)		Policy imitation	36.0	N/AProposed approach (Q() learned from	75.1	N/AMonte-Carlo sampling)5 Conclusions and Open ProblemsWe present MMBM, a general IRL model that takes multifaceted human motivations into consid-
Figure 3: Illustrative execution of Alg. 1 on WoWAHTable 3:	Different types of motivations in WoWAH and corresponding definitionsMotv. Category & Definitionr1 Advancement describes how fast the player levels up in the game. It’s thespeed the user levels up, divided by the averaged speed at the entire WoWAH.
Figure 4: Top: trends of different kinds of motivations during from Mar 2006 to Jan 2009; Bottom:the enlargement of the top figure during around the release of patch Wraith of the Lich Kingversus-player (PvP) to compete with other human players to get more familiar with the mechanismof their new avatar. It is also noticed that the satisfactions are not independent of each other: playersspend more time on advancement usually have insufficient time to complete tasks which requireteamwork but provides no experience for leveling up. As shown in Fig. 4, that the component forteamwork decreases each time the component for advancement increases, and vice versa.
