Figure 1: (a) A sketch of how Step-wise Sensitivity Analysis can be used to provide interpretation for ashark prediction (for actual output examples, see Fig. 3). Each step identifies PDRs of relevant neurons, andfor each PDR recursively traverses downwards. (b) Schematic Representation of Step-wise sensitivity analysisrepresenting the two novelties in the single step between adjacent layers. First, the relevant neurons are the onesWith positive outlier values in the distribution of ω, represented With a boxplot (ω 〜).Second, the analysis isaggregated across instance-specific inputs to gain model-centric results.
Figure 2: (a) Barplot representing the frequency of occurrence for the positive outliers in layer ffc2 for theHammerhead shark class- the y-axis represents the number of images, in which a neuron was a positive outlier.
Figure 3: Dependency graphs for hammerhead shark and Egyptian cat classes of the relevant neurons forthe penultimate 4 layers, excluding the pooling layer. The graphs expose the links only between the relevantneurons with a branching factor of 3. Notice the multiple connections to fb5C3 (red circle). Notice also thesimilarities in the subgraphs of ff8c20 (blue rectangle) for both, shark and cat classes.
Figure 4: a) A clustered heatmap (clustermap) of each of the 10 dependency graphs (spanning the entirenetwork) into a bag-of-nodes features representation. The x,y,z-axis respectively represent neuron, class, andpresence of the neuron in the dependency graph — red present, blue abscent. The dendrograms on the side in-dicate the relative distance between points and clusters. Notice the three small clusters of semantically similarclasses on the side. b) & c) Heatmaps representing standard sensitivity analysis of activation map fb553 indi-cating the regions of the image from the corresponding class. Red and blue respectively correspond to positiveor negative contribution to the activation.
Figure 5: A heatmap of all activation maps at layer fb5c3, relevant to neuron f1f8c220 for the respective classes.
