Figure 1: Learning to unfurl a ribbon: A three dimensional Helical Ribbon and its two dimen-sional embedding learned using a two-layer MLP. The network was trained using estimated pairwisegeodesic distances between only 100 points (marked in black) out of the total 8192 samples.
Figure 2: Siamese Configurationconstructing pairs {X(1k), X(2k), λ(k)}k=1 where λ(k) ∈ {0, 1} is a label for indicating a positive (aneighbor) or negative pair (not a neighbor) by building a nearest neighbor graph from the manifolddata.
Figure 3: 2D embeddings of a three dimensional S-Curve Manifold generated by a 2-Layer MLPwith 70 hidden nodes, that was trained with varying number of landmark points obtained with theFarthest Point Sampling Algorithm.
Figure 4: Exploring the variations in architecture and the number of landmarks: (a) The log-arithm of stress of all 8172 points as a function of number of landmarks. (b) Order of accuracyestimates of varying architectures.
Figure 5: Visualizing a horizon articulation manifold: 1000 samples generated as per equations8 and 9 with ωι = 2, ω2 = 7. The color is proportional to the magnitude ʌ/ɑɪ + α2ISOMAP	HLLE	LLE与幼乙LE	DrLim	Our Method(a)(b)Figure 6: (a) Comparing metric preserving properties for different manifold learning algorithms onthe image articulation manifold dataset. LE: Belkin & Niyogi (2003), DrLim: Hadsell et al. (2006).
Figure 6: (a) Comparing metric preserving properties for different manifold learning algorithms onthe image articulation manifold dataset. LE: Belkin & Niyogi (2003), DrLim: Hadsell et al. (2006).
Figure 7: Comparing with nonparametric out-of-sample extensions: (a) Comparing numericalstress values of embeddings generated for training and test data of our method and the interpolatingformulation of Landmark Isomap. (b) Visualizing the non-local generalization properties of ourmethod (top) and Landmark Isomap (bottom). Both algorithms were trained on the same Landmarks(in red) sampled from only a part of the manifold.
Figure 8: Camera Pose Manifold: Embedding results and training times for Landmark-Isomap,DrLim Hadsell et al. (2006) and our approach. Our hybrid parametric approach shows a faithfulresult for a smaller training time.
