Figure 1: Architecture of Recurrent GAN and Conditional Recurrent GAN models.
Figure 2: RGAN is capable of generating realistic-looking examples.
Figure 3: Trace of generator (dotted), dis-criminator (solid) loss, MMD2 score and loglikelihood of generated samples under thedata distribution during training for RGANgenerating smooth sequences (output in Fig-ure 2a.)Figure 4: Back-projectingtraining examples into thelatent space and linearly in-terpolating them producessmooth variation in the sam-ple space. Top plot showssample-space distance fromtop (green, dashed) sampleto bottom (orange, dotted).
Figure 4: Back-projectingtraining examples into thelatent space and linearly in-terpolating them producessmooth variation in the sam-ple space. Top plot showssample-space distance fromtop (green, dashed) sampleto bottom (orange, dotted).
Figure 5: Probability of violating -differential privacy (δ) during training,for different values of . Gaussian noiseThe true value of δ for the results in Table 2b is lowerbecause the optimal epoch (assessed using the validationset) for most replicates was below 30.
Figure 6: Data from three realeICU patients (purple, blue, gold)of the first five hours after admis-sion. Noise from N(0,σ2) forσe = 0.1σ has been added to pro-tect privacy, where σ is the stan-dard deviation of the true data (forthat variable). We compare the dataat its original sampling resolutionwith downsampled to one measure-ment every 15 minutes (the settingused in this paper) and 30 min-utes. High-frequency fluctuationsare lost through downsampling, butgeneral trends and some variabil-ity are preserved in the 15 minutecase. These patients were selectedrandomly from the set of patientswith minimal missing data duringthe time period and so are represen-
Figure 7: Three random samples from thegenerator trained on eICU data. These sam-ples are from the synthetic datasets used in theTSTR experiments in section 5.1. The gen-erator produces data in [-1,1], so to obtainmedically relevant values, the inverse of thescaling transformation used on the trainingdata has been applied. This transformationwas to scale each variable at each time-pointindependently to the range [-1,1]. An unusu-ally high value (likely an artefact) in the meanarterial pressure at 135 minutes after admis-sion is responsible for the apparent downwardspike in the generated data.
Figure 8: Marginal distributions for each variable at each timepoint: Colour intensity shows thefraction of samples at that time point falling within a bin of values (25 bins over the full range)for that variable. Each subfigure shows the same data under different transformations (to and from[-1, 1]), and zooming in. The synthetic data consists of the generated datasets from all five replicatesof the TSTR experiment in eICU described in section 5.1 with TSTR results reported in Table 2a.
Figure 9: Histograms comparing the marginal distributions of each eICU variable (over all timepoints)between synthetic and real data. The synthetic data is that used in the TSTR experiments (fivereplicates) in section 5.1.
