Figure 1: Baseline-corrected space-by-time non-negative matrix factorization. On the left, two trialswith spike counts recorded from 5 neurons and 9 time points each are illustrated as a spike count wordmatrix. The pre-stimulus baseline is subtracted from the spike count word matrix in order to discountthe baseline. Then, the signed corrected activity is decomposed into non-negative spatial modulesdescribing coactive neurons, non-negative temporal modules describing the temporal response profileof the population and signed activation coefficient. Each pair of spatial and temporal modules can becombined to form a spatio-temporal module.
Figure 2: Examples of spatial and temporal modules and activation coefficients identified by SbT-NMF and BC-SbT-NMF on data recorded simultaneously from 43 retinal ganglion cells during lowcontrast flicker stimulation. (a) Ten non-negative spatial modules (one module per column). (b) Tennon-negative temporal modules (one module per row). (c) Two trials of four classes of activationcoefficient matrices containing coefficients for all pairs of spatial and temporal modules. (d)-(f) Likea-c, but for BC-SbT-NMF.
Figure 3: (a) Decoding performance of SbT-NMF (dark and light blue) and BC-SbT-NMF (dark andlight red) decompositions of spiking activity recorded from three retinas during natural movie (darkblue and dark red, NMD/NMM) and high contrast flicker (light blue and light red, HC) stimulation.
Figure S1:	Decoding performance of SbT-NMF and BC-SbT-NMF on discretized spike trains withfour different time resolutions (5 ms, 10 ms, 20 ms and 50 ms) recorded from three retinas duringpresentation of natural movie, high contrast flicker, step of light and low contrast flicker stimuli.
Figure S2:	Comparison of decoding performance of various methods. (a) Decoding performance ofSbT-NMF, BC-SbT-NMF, orthogonal Tucker2, BC-orthogonal Tucker 2, spatiotemporal PCA, BC-spatiotemporal PCA, spatiotemporal ICA and BC-spatiotemporal ICA on spiking activities recordedfrom three retinas during presentation of natural movie (NMD/NMM) and high contrast flicker (HC)stimuli. (b) Same as a, but for step of light (SoL) and low contrast flicker (LC) stimuli.
Figure S3: L1-regularization on BC-SbT-NMF spatial and temporal modules obtained from step oflight stimuli (SoL). (a) Decoding performance of BC-SbT-NMF regularized with 0, 1, 10,100, 1000,10000 and 100000 sparsity constraints. (b-h) Examples of spatial and temporal modules identifiedby BC-SbT-NMF regularized with λ = 0 (b), λ = 1 (c), λ = 10 (d), λ = 100 (e), λ = 1000 (f),λ = 10000 (g) and λ = 100000 (h).
Figure S4:	Convergence of multiplicative update rules. (a-c) Reconstruction error of SbT-NMFdecomposition as a function of update rule iteration during (a) Natural Movie (NMM), (b) HighContrast flicker (HC) and (c) Low Contrast flicker (LC) stimuli. (d-f) Same as (a-c) but for BC-SbT-NMF decomposition.
Figure S5:	Evaluation of multiple decompositions with random initializations to avoid local minima.
Figure S6:	Effect of number of modules on decoding performance. Training set decoding performanceof (a) SbT-NMF and (b) BC-SbT-NMF for different numbers of spatial and temporal modules for thenatural movie stimulus. Optimal numbers are marked by red squares.
