Figure 1: The invariant functions discussed in paper applied to the yellow car on the upper left. Inthe first row from the left: original image, the first symmetric polynomial, the second symmetricpolynomial, the third symmetric polynomial. In the second row: all symmetric polynomials, pixel-wise maximum, pixel-wise minimum and the ordered networkx + y + z, p2(x, y, z) = xy + yz + yz and p3(x, y, z) = xyz, and variants of sorting: q1 =max{x, y, z}, q2 = min{x, y, z}, q3 = sort{x, y, z}. It is obvious that these functions are invariantunder permutations of its inputs. So for instance p1(x, y, z) = p1 (y, z, x) and so on. We could alsoconsider linear combinations of these function. We did this only for the symmetric functions. InFigure 1 we applied all permutation invariant functions to the yellow car shown on the upper left.
Figure 2: The figure show some images of the NHTSA data set, one for each class.
Figure 3: A sketch of the baseline architecture shown on the left and the order architectures shown onthe right. On the right the images is first passed through an inv-block an then to a network identical tothe baseline network. The inv-block either orders the rgb-values of each pixel, or applies a 3x3x3x3convolution to the image and then orders each pixel. The network block is in all cases an identicalvariant of alexnet.
Figure 4: The net was trained on all-train and tested on all-test. This shows the accuracy over theiteration in table and plot. The highlighted row shows the 25000 iteration at which all results areanalyzed.
Figure 5: The nets were train on all-train and evaluated on red-test. The figure on the shows thehistogram of one hundred sampled subsets of the test data containing only red cars. This results in anaccuracy of rgb network of 0.5113 ± 0.0306, an accuracy of the order network of 0.5420 ± 0.0284,and an accuracy of worder network of 0.5411 ± 0.0280.
Figure 6:	This shows the accuracies as heatmap of the thirty test classes of the nets trained on all-train. Each row represents on of the bodytype classes numbered 00 to 09. The columns of the blocksrepresent the rgb-network the order network and the weighted order network. The block on the leftare the accuracies computed on all cars. The block in the middle the non-red cars, and the block onthe right are the accuracies computed on all red cars.
Figure 7:	This shows the heatmap of the thirty test classes of the nets trained on nonred-train. As afurther analysis we may count the times the net beat its competitors. This shows again that the ordernetworks perform better than the baseline.
Figure 8: The net were trained on eleven training sets each with a fixed ratio of red / non-red carsper class. In the paper we called this data set even-train. Starting with no red car at 0 on the x-axisand only red cars at 1 on the x-axis. The nets were than evaluated on all-test, non-test and red-test.
Figure 9: The plot show the deviation from the true color distribution per class while changing theratio of red to non-red car.
Figure 10: The figure shows two images of crashed cars and two close-ups.
Figure 11: The net was trained on all-train and tested on nored-test. This shows the accuracy overthe iteration in table and plot. The net was trained on all cars and tested on the non red ars. Thehighlighted row shows the 25000 iteration at which all results are analyzed.
Figure 12: The net was trained on nored-train and tested on all-test. This shows the accuracy overthe iteration in table and plot. The highlighted row shows the 25000 iteration at which all results areanalyzed.
Figure 13: The net was trained on nored-train and tested on nored-test. This shows the accuracyover the iteration in table and plot. The net was trained on all cars and tested on the non red ars. Thehighlighted row shows the 25000 iteration at which all results are analyzed.
Figure 14: The nets were train on nored-train and evaluated on red-test. The figure on the shows thehistogram of one hundred sampled subsets of the test data containing only red cars. This results in anaccuracy of rgb network of 0.3707 ± 0.0272, an accuracy of the order network of 0.4583 ± 0.0281,and an accuracy of worder network of 0.3864 ± 0.0280.
Figure 15: The net was trained on allred-in09-train and tested on all-test. This shows the accuracyover the iteration in table and plot. The highlighted row shows the 25000 iteration at which allresults are analyzed.
Figure 16: The net was trained on allred-in09-train and tested on nored-test. This shows the accu-racy over the iteration in table and plot. The net was trained on all cars and tested on the non red ars.
Figure 17: The nets were train on allred-in09-train and evaluated on red-test. The figure on theshows the histogram of one hundred sampled subsets of the test data containing only red cars. Thisresults in an accuracy of rgb network of 0.2166 ± 0.0198, an accuracy of the order network of0.2620 ± 0.0224, and an accuracy of worder network of 0.1940 ± 0.0181.
Figure 18: The nets were trained on allred09-train. This shows the accuracy as measured on thethirty class data sets. Each row represents on of the bodytype classes numbered 00 to 09. Thecolumns of the blocks represent the rgb-network the order network and the weighted order network.
