Figure 1: Examples of long distance dependencies between sentencesOur approach leveraging such structural elements has several advantages. First, it can learn fromtechnical documents containing several subtopics that may cause sudden context changes. Some sen-tences have dependences to distant ones if a different perspective of the topic is introduced. Using1Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Table 1: Categorization of sentence embedding methods. * denotes unsupervised methods.
Figure 2: A sample text with a bulleted list3.3	LinksHyperlinks (DH): Some sentences contain hyperlinks or references to provide additional informa-tion or clarify the meaning of the sentence. We can enrich the representation of the sentence usingthe linked document. In this work, we use the title of the linked document in the embedding of thesentence. Alternatively, we can use the embedding of the linked document.
Figure 3: Our model architecture.
Figure 4: Performance per entity types6.4	Dependency importanceNote that udep in Equation 1 denotes the importance level of a dependency dep. In Table 5, weshow the relative importance of the different dependencies compared to the sequential dependency(DW,-1), which is used in other methods. The values show their relative importance levels when theimportance of DW,-1 is set to 1. As we can see, all levels of document and section titles, except thefourth level subsection title, play a much more significant role than the sequential dependency. Thereason the title from the metadata, (DTM), does not have a high weight as the title from the heading1 tag (DTH1) is that the metadata contains extra text, “- Wikipedia”, in the title for Wikipedia articles(e.g., “George W. Bush - Wikipedia” instead of “George W. Bush”). Further, hyperlinks (DH), in-document links (DF) and formatted lists (DLF) are all shown to have a similar influence as thesequence dependency. The remaining dependencies, DTC, DTR, DTS, and DLT are scarcely foundin the Wikipedia corpus, and thus, did not converge or were not updated.
