Figure 1: Diagram of our systempaper we show how to use a small amount of this data (results on 1000 images) to efficiently tune agenerative model to produce images which increase PIR. In this work we focus on simulated PIRvalues as a proof of concept, but in future work we will investigate PIR values from real interactions.
Figure 2: Effect size (number of standard deviations change in mean PIR) on a variety of tasks.
Figure 3: Color objective sample images. Samples are randomly drawn, not cherry-picked.
Figure 4: Change in mean PIR vs. estimated change in mean PIR. Points for which the change inmean PIR is not significant by a Welch’s t-test with a threshold of α = 0.001 are partially transparent.
Figure 5: Change in mean PIR vs. initial variability. Points for which the change in mean PIR is notsignificant by a Welch’s t-test with a threshold of α = 0.001 are partially transparent.
Figure 6: Effect size evolution over two iterationslearn from. Still, when attempting to use this system in practice, it is important to keep in mind thatstarting with a sufficiently expressive generative model will more likely produce better results thanstarting with a more limited model.
Figure 7: Change in mean PIR on a variety of tasks. Each panel represents a set of tasks (such assingle filters from VGG), each color/column represents a subset (such as a single layer within VGG),and each point represents one objective (such as a single filter from that layer) for which we optimizedthe generative model. Points for which the change in mean PIR is not significant by a Welch’s t-testwith a threshold of α = 0.001 are partially transparent.
Figure 8: Percent non-zero PIRs vs. effect size (Single-filter VGG tasks and color tasks)that the feature representations at these layers tended to be quite sparse, so many of the simulatedPIRs we generated were actually zero to within the bin width of our PIR estimator. Respectively,these layers had only 20%, 25%, and 24% non-zero PIRs (collapsing across filters), and around halfthe filters in each (resp. 6, 4, and 5) were producing > 90% zero PIRs. (By contrast, the layer withthe next greatest number of zero PIRs, fc8, still had 69% nonzero PIRs overall, and had no filters inwhich 90% or more of the PIRs were zero.) In a few cases on layers 5, 6, and 7, all of the generatedPIRs were zero. This clearly makes learning infeasible, and indeed we noted that there was a strongrelationship between number of non-zero simulated PIRs in the training dataset and the ability of oursystem to improve PIR (see Fig. 8). This is somewhat troubling, since probably most images in thereal world will not produce a PIR that is truly zero.
