Figure 1: The graphical models representing the architectures of different environment models.
Figure 2: The architecture of the Imagination-Augmented Agent, which computes its policy πt andvalue function Vt , by combining information from a model-free path with information from Monte-Carlo rollouts of its environment model.
Figure 3: Learning curves of different agents on the MS_PACMAN environment. Model-basedImagination-Augmented Agents (I2As) outperform the model-free baseline by a large margin. Fur-thermore, learning the rollout policy πr , either by back-propagation or distillation provides the bestresults.
Figure 4: The architecture of the inference model q for the dSSM-VAE.
Figure 5: The architecture of the inference model q for the sSSM.
Figure 7: Definition of the residual convolutional stack res_conv.
Figure 8: Definition of the Pool & Inject layer.
Figure 9: Transition module for computing the state transition function st = g(st-1, zt, at-1).
Figure 10: Decoder module for computing the log-odds statistics of the Bernoulli distributions overthe pixels ot and the binary coefficients of the reward brtc = PnN=-01 bt,n2n .
Figure 11: Encoder module computing an embedding e(ot) of an observation ot (not including thereward).
Figure 12: Prior module for computing mean 乩之t and diagonal variance。％七 of the normal distribu-tionp(zt|st-1, at-1).
Figure 13: Posterior module for computing mean μzt and diagonal variance σzt of the normaldistribution q(Zt ∣st-1, at-1, ot). The posterior gets as additional inputs the prior statistics μzt, σzt.
Figure 14: Initial state module for computing the first initial state s0 as a function of the embeddinge(oi) for i = -2, -1, 0 of three previous observations.
Figure 15: Learning curves of the environment models on MS_PACMAN.
Figure 16: Rollouts from a deterministic (dSSM, above) and a stochastic (sSSM, below) state-spacemodel trained on a bouncing ball dataset with diffusion.
Figure 17: Two rollouts of length τ = 6 from a stochastic (sSSM, top two rows) and one rolloutfrom a deterministic (dSSM) state-space model for the MS PACMAN environment, given the sameinitial frames and the same sequence of five actions.
Figure 18: Model results.
