Figure 1: Architecture of the deep predictive coding neural network•	The neurons in a given layer in the network, shown in Figure 1 project to neurons onlyin their receptive field. This implies that the neurons in a particular channel in layer l areconnected to the neurons in layer (l + 1) through filters that are learned independently.
Figure 3: Images reconstructed by the generative model using the latent representations for thetranslated images. Again, the images are arranged in a table with 2 columns and each cell in the tablecontains a set of five images. The first image in each cell shows a translated version of the originalimage from the CIFAR data set and the following 4 images represent the images reconstructed bythe model using latent representations generated at different layers in the network.
Figure 4: Non-training images reconstructed by the generative model using the latent representationsestimated by predictive coding. These images are also arranged in 2 columns and each cell showsthe original image and the images reconstructed from its latent representations.
Figure 5: Example images reconstructed by the generative model when the estimated latent causesare presented at corresponding layers in the network. The images are arranged in a table with 2columns, separated by the vertical bar. Each cell in the table contains a set of five images. The firstimage in each cell represents the original image from the CIFAR data set and the following 4 imagesrepresent the images reconstructed by the model using latent representations generated at layers 1,2, 3, 4 in the network.
Figure 6: Images reconstructed by the generative model using the latent representations for thetranslated images. Again, the images are arranged in a table with 2 columns and each cell in the tablecontains a set of five images. The first image in each cell shows a translated version of the originalimage from the CIFAR data set and the following 4 images represent the images reconstructed bythe model using latent representations generated at different layers in the network.
Figure 7: Non-training images reconstructed by the generative model using the latent representationsestimated by predictive coding. These images are also arranged in 2 columns and each cell showsthe original image and the images reconstructed from its latent representations.
