Figure 1: Quotes from four different market par-ticipants (sources) for the same CDS1 throughoutone day. Each trader displays from time to timethe prices for which he offers to buy (bid) and sell(ask) the underlying CDS. The filled area marksthe difference between the best sell and buy offers(spread) at each time.
Figure 2: (A) Fixed sampling frequency andit’s drawbacks; keeping all available informationleads to much more datapoints. (B) Proposed datarepresentation for the asynchronous series. Con-secutive observations are stored together as a sin-gle value series, regardless of which series theybelong to; this information, however, is storedin indicator features, alongside durations betweenobservations.
Figure 3: A scheme of the proposed SOCNNarchitecture. The network preserves the time-dimension up to the top layer, while the numberof features per timestep (filters) in the hidden lay-ers is custom. The last convolutional layer, how-ever, has the number of filters equal to dimensionof the output. The Weighting frame shows howoutputs from offset and significance networks arecombined in accordance with Eq. 10.
Figure 4: Learning curves for CNNs and SOCNNs with differ-ent auxiliary weights for two datasets. The solid lines indicatethe test error while the dashed lines indicate the training error.
Figure 5: Experiment comparing robustness of the considered networks for Asynchronous 16dataset. The plots show how the error would change if an additional noise term was added to theinput series. The dotted curves show the total significance and average absolute offset (not to scale)outputs for the noisy observations. Interestingly, significance of the noisy observations increaseswith the magnitude of noise; i.e. noisy observations are far from being discarded by SOCNN.
Figure 6: Simulated synchronous (left) and asynchronous (right) artificial series. Note the differentdurations between the observations from different sources in the latter plot. For clarity, we presentonly 6 out of 16 total dimensions.
Figure 7: Activations of the significance and offset sub-networks for the network trained on Electric-ity dataset. We present 25 most recent out of 60 past values included in the input data, for 3 separatedatapoints. Note the log scale on the left graph.
