Figure 1: The relations of our work with prior arts.
Figure 2: The architecture of AAE without (left) and with (right) the code generator.
Figure 3: The overall training architecture.
Figure 4: Alternation of training phases: (a) the AAE phase and (b) the prior improvement phase.
Figure 5: Images generated by our model and AAE trained on MNIST (upper) and CIFAR-10(lower).
Figure 6: Images generated by our model and AAE trained on MNIST (upper) and CIFAR-10(lower). In this experiment, the latent code dimension is increased significantly to 64-D and 2000-Dfor MNIST and CIFAR-10, respectively. For AAE, the re-parameterization trick is applied to theoutput of the encoder as suggested in (Makhzani et al., 2015).
Figure 7: Supervised learning architecture with the code generator.
Figure 8: Images generated by the proposed model (a)(c)(e) and AAE (b)(d)(f) trained on MNIST,SVHN and CIFAR-10 datasets in the supervised setting. Each column of images have the samelabel/class information but varied Gaussian noise. On the other hand, each row of images have thesame Gaussian noise but varied label/class variables.
Figure 9: Visualization of the code generator output in the supervised setting.
Figure 10: Unsupervised learning architecture with the code generator.
Figure 11: Images generated by the proposed model (a)(c)(e) and AAE (b)(d)(f) trained on MNIST,SVHN and CIFAR-10 datasets in the unsupervised setting. Each column of images have the samelabel/class information but varied Gaussian noise. On the other hand, each row of images have thesame Gaussian noise but varied label/class variables.
Figure 12: Visualization of the encoder output versus the code generator output in the unsupervisedsetting.
Figure 13: Generated images from text descriptions.
Figure 14: Generated images in accordance with the varying color attribute in the text description”The flower is pink in color and has petals that are rounded in shape and ruffled.” From left toright, the color attribute is set to pink, red, yellow, orange, purple, blue, white, green, and black,respectively. Note that there is no green or black flower in the dataset.
