Figure 2:	Five environments on which we evaluate our modelWe first test the efficiency and validity of our model. After testifying the correctness of the overallmodel, we visualize the distribution of tendency hints and the starting sets of phases. Then we focuson the optional keyframe scheme, verify its compatibility to our method and prove our method’s ro-bustness to keyframes of different qualities. Finally, we apply our model to long-term manipulationchallenges with large state spaces to show our advantages.
Figure 3:	The training results of ablation experiments underthree different conditions (mean to standard deviation with 5random seeds).
Figure 4: The training results of40 × 40 Maze task with 9 × 9observations. Phase administra-tor proves to improve training ef-ficiency.
Figure 5: The distribution of tendency hints and generated phases in parts of Super Mario Brosgame. The purple background color represents positive hints while the blue ones indicate negativehints. The points in the figure indicate the starting points of Mario. Points with same color belongto a same phase.
Figure 6: Learning curves of our model, the data-efficient RL and PBRS from demonstration withkeyframes / demonstrations of different qualities. Tendency RL is able to achieve a quite satisfactoryperformance without much human labor.
Figure 7: The tendency heatmap at the height of 4cm, withdifferent gripper poses in theconveyance task of a crane.
Figure 8: The training result of the Super Mario Bros level 1-1. The red curve indicates the Mario’spolicy.
Figure 9: The cases where the agent needs new skills in level 1-2 and level 1-3.
Figure 10: The agent,s policies in 8 special phases sampled from misleading key states. The purplepoints are collected by combining the testing results for 30 times. In the end the detouring keyframesare completely neglected by the agent.
Figure 11: Learning curve of the grasping task with different numbers of keyframes. The trainingefficiency is relatively higher when 13 keyframes are used. If the number of keyframes is too largeor too small, training tends to become less efficient, but still stable.
Figure 12: Five key states for the conveyance challenge and skills required by these states.
Figure 13: Another tendency heat map of the conveyance task.
Figure 14: Some key states and the corresponding observations in the pick-and-place challenge.
