Figure 1: The E2E method. The first few frames are encoded and fed into the predictor as context.
Figure 2: The segment of the EPEVmethod in which the encoder and pre-dictor are trained together. The encoderis trained to produce an encoding thatis easy to predict, and the predictor istrained to predict that encoding into thefuture. The average of the losses is min-imized.
Figure 3: The segment of the EPEV methodin which the encoder and VAN are trainedtogether. The encoder is trained to producean encoding that is informative to the VAN,while the VAN is trained to output the im-age given the encoding. The average of thelosses is minimized. This method is similarto an autoencoder.
Figure 4: A visual comparison of the different methods on the robot push dataset. In the E2E andEPEV methods, the yellow object moves, but it does not in the individual method.
Figure 5: A visual comparison of the EPEV method and CDNA from Finn et al. (2016) as thebaseline. This example is cherry picked to show the typical quality of predictions from both methods.
Figure 6: A visual comparison of the EPEV method and CDNA from Finn et al. (2016) as thebaseline. This example is cherry picked to show results when there is significant movement in theground truth. See appendix section G for non cherry picked results. The contrast of these images wasincreased to make the humans easier to see. In CDNA from Finn et al. (2016), the person disappearedpart way through the prediction. The EPEV method, produced relatively sharp predictions up untilframe 42, and a blurry human prediction at frame 63.
Figure 7: Confidence of the person detector that a person is in the image (“person score”). Thebaseline method is CDNA from Finn et al. (2016).
Figure 8: The screen shown to workers in the human evaluationC EPEV method with encoder output fed to VANTo see what the encoder has learned in the EPEV method, we can obtain results from the visualanalogy network given the input from the encoder. The encoder is given the ground truth image.
Figure 9: Results from the EPEV approach when the VAN is given the output of the encoder on theground truth frame.
