Figure 1: From left to right, the images are the original image, a contrast stretched image, an imagewith impulsive noise contamination, and a Gaussian smoothed image. Although these images differgreatly in quality, they all have the same MSE from the original image (about 400), suggesting thatMSE is a limited technique for measuring image quality.
Figure 2: Comparison of the gradient (edges in the image) for models 11 (BEGAN) and 12 (scaledBEGAN+GMSM), where O is the original image, A is the autoencoded image, OG is the gradientof the original image, AG is the gradient of the autoencoded image, and S is the gradient magnitudesimilarity score for the discriminator (D) and generator (G). White equals greater similarity (betterperformance) and black equals lower similarity for the final column.
Figure 3: Comparison of the chrominance for models 9 (BEGAN+GMSM+Chrom), 11 (BEGAN)and 12 (scaled BEGAN+GMSM), where O is the original image, OC is the original image in thecorresponding color space, A is the autoencoded image in the color space, and S is the chrominancesimilarity score. I and Q indicate the (blue-red) and (green-purple) color dimensions, respectively.
Figure 4: Four outputs of each of the generators of all 12 models. The best images for each modelwere hand-picked. The first row is model 1, which corresponds with the original BEGAN model.
Figure 5: The new distance functions did not affect image diversity in the latent space of z. The topthree rows are linear interpolations from model 11 (BEGAN) and the bottom three are from model12 (scaled BEGAN+GMSM).
Figure 6: Measure of convergence and quality of the results for Models 11 (BEGAN; top images)and 12 (scaled BEGAN+GMSM; bottom images). The results were smoothed with a Gaussian withσ = 0.9. Images are displayed in 40,000 epoch increments starting with epoch 20,000 and goingto 300,000. The output of earlier training epochs appear to be more youthful. As training proceeds,finer details are learned by the model, resulting in apparent increased age.
