Figure 1: A model that detects critical structure (colored in black) for the graph classification task(enzymes classification in this case) can help people to understand why a protein is of a specifiedclass or not.
Figure 2: (a)OH function group is the critical structure to tell Alcohols from Alkanes. (b) The sym-metry hydrocarbon group (at two sides of the methyl branch) is the critical structure to discriminatebetween symmetric and asymmetric isomer of methylnonane.
Figure 3: Filters and neighborhood in (a) Spatial GCN by BrUna et al. (2013). The filter W is asparse matrix, which is not aimed to scan for detecting local patterns, but to learn connectivity ofclusters based on cluster features X. (b) DCNN by Atwood & Towsley (2016) that scans through thediffusion matrix of each node. (c) Patchy-San by Niepert et al. (2016) that scans adjacency matrixof local neighborhood of each node. (d) Neural Fingerprints by Duvenaud et al. (2015) that scansapproximated neighborhood (specially, the summation of neighbors, embeddings) of each node. (e)Ego-Convolution scans egocentric designed neighborhoods of each node.
Figure 4: The model architecture of Ego-CNN. Our egocentric design defines neighborhood on thesame node (dashed line indicates the neighborhoods centered at the same node). Neighborhoods areenlarged through Ego-Convolution by aggregating neighbors, neighborhoods.
Figure 5: Our definition of neighborhoods is egocentric to a node (in bold black), which includesits(colored in black) and its neighbors’ neighborhoods (centered in the black node).
Figure 6: A receptive field of Ego-CNN effective enlarges the coverage on graph as depth increases.
Figure 7: The degree distribution of Reddit dataset follows a power-law in log-log plot.
Figure 8: Visualization of critical structures on Alkane vs Alcohol. The critical structures arecolored in grey and the node/edge size is proportional to its importance. The OH-base in Alcoholsis always considered critical.
Figure 9: Visualization of critical structures on Asymmetric Isomers vs Symmetric Isomers. Thecritical structures are colored in grey and the node/edge size is proportional to its importance. Thecritical patterns detected are roughly symmetric from the methyl branching node, which means thenetwork somehow learned to count from the branching node to see if the structure is symmetric ornot.
Figure 10: Visualization of critical structures on Reddit dataset. The critical structures are coloredin grey and the node/edge size is proportional to its importance.
