Figure 1: We show examples of distribution mismatches induced by the previous interpolationschemes when using a uniform prior in two dimensions. Our matched interpolation avoids this witha minimal modification to the linear trajectory, traversing through the space such that all points alongthe path are distributed identically to the prior.
Figure 2: Distribution of the squared norm ky k2 of midpoints for two prior distributions in 100dimensions: (a) components uniform on [-1, 1] and (b) components Gaussian N(0, 1), for linearinterpolation, our proposed matched interpolation and the spherical interpolation proposed by White(2016). Both linear and spherical interpolation introduce a distribution mismatch, whereas our pro-posed matched interpolation preserves the prior distribution for both priors.
Figure 3: We show the monotone transport maps for linear interpolation evaluated at t ∈{0.05, 0.25, 0.5}, to Uniform and Gaussian priors.
Figure 4:	2-point interpolation: Each example shows linear, SLERP and transport matched inter-polation from top to bottom respectively. For LLD icon dataset (a) and LSUN (b), outputs areproduced with DCGAN using a uniform prior distribution, whereas the CelebA model (c) uses aGaussian prior. The output resolution for the (a) is 32 × 32, for (b) and (c) 64 × 64 pixels.
Figure 5:	Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on LLD icon dataset with uniform prior.
Figure 6: Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on LSUN (64 × 64) with uniform prior.
Figure 7: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained on LSUN(128 × 128) using a uniform prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP anddistribution matched interpolation.
Figure 8: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained on icondataset using a uniform prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP and distributionmatched interpolation.
Figure 9: Vicinity sampling on LSUN dataset (128 × 128) with uniform prior. The sample in themiddle is perturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
Figure 10: Vicinity sampling on LLD icon dataset with uniform prior. The sample in the middle isperturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
Figure 11: Random walk for LLD, LSUN (64 x 64) and CelebA. The random walks consist of asuccession of steps in random directions, calculated for the same sequence of directions using (non-matched) vicinity sampling in the upper rows and our proposed matched vicinity sampling in thelower rows.
Figure 12: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained onCelebA with Gaussian prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP and distributionmatched interpolation.
Figure 13: Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on CelebA with Gaussian prior.
Figure 14: Vicinity sampling on CelebA dataset with Gaussian prior. The sample in the middle isperturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
Figure 15: 2-point interpolation in detail: Each example shows linear, SLERP and transport matchedinterpolation from top to bottom respectively, with 16 points taken from the path, produced withDCGAN using a uniform prior distribution.
