Figure 1: We make the simple observation that if you remove an object from an image, the image stilllooks natural (middle). However, if you remove a random patch, the image likely looks unnatural(right). In this paper, we leverage this counterfactual signal for image segmentation.
Figure 2: Network Architecture: We visualize our neural network architecture. Given an inputimage, we generate K layers and masks to combine them. However, each layer only has a certainprobability of being combined with the current composite.
Figure 3: Example Layers: We visualize some generations from different layers. For example, somelayers specialize to segmenting and generating windows, while others specialize to beds. We note thatthe model does not attach semantics to the layers. Each layer is given a name by hand after training.
Figure 4: Example Results: The left image contains some cases where we correctly segment themask of objects, and the right image contains some failure cases. The first row is the generated mask,second row is the ground truth mask, and third row is the input image.
Figure 5: Precision-Recall: We plot precision-recall curves for each layer’s mask. Our approachobtains good precision with low recall, suggesting that the model’s most confident segmentations arefairly accurate. Notice how layers tend to specialize to certain object categories. The mask from layer4 works well for segmenting windows, but the same layer does not work for beds. A similar trendexists for mask 5, but segments beds. This suggests that the model learns to group objects.
Figure 6: Performance versus size of labeled data. We plot segmentation performance versus thesize of the labeled dataset during fine-tuning. In general, more labeled data improves performance.
Figure 7: Visualizing Layer Decomposition: We visualize the outputs of different layers from ourmodel given an input image. Different layers automatically emerge to both reconstruct objects andtheir masks, which we use for semantic segmentation. Moreover, this enables potential graphicsapplications, such as de-occluding objects in an image.
