Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Emergence of Linguistic Communication from
Referential Games with Symbolic and Pixel
Input
Angeliki Lazaridou∖ Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls, Stephen Clark
DeepMind,
London, UK
Ab stract
The ability of algorithms to evolve or learn (compositional) communication pro-
tocols has traditionally been studied in the language evolution literature through
the use of emergent communication tasks. Here we scale up this research by us-
ing contemporary deep learning methods and by training reinforcement-learning
neural network agents on referential communication games. We extend previ-
ous work, in which agents were trained in symbolic environments, by developing
agents which are able to learn from raw pixel data, a more challenging and realis-
tic input representation. We find that the degree of structure found in the input data
affects the nature of the emerged protocols, and thereby corroborate the hypoth-
esis that structured compositional language is most likely to emerge when agents
perceive the world as being structured.
1	Introduction
The study of emergent communication is important for two related problems in language develop-
ment, both human and artificial: language evolution, the development of communication protocols
from scratch (Nowak & Krakauer, 1999); and language acquisition, the ability of an embodied
agent to learn an existing language. In this paper we focus on the problem of how environmental
or pre-linguistic conditions affect the nature of the communication protocol that an agent learns.
The increasing realism and complexity of environments being used for grounded language learning
(Brockman et al., 2016; Hermann et al., 2017) present an opportunity to analyse these effects in
detail.
In line with previous work on emergent communication, we are strongly motivated by the view that
language derives meaning from its use (Wittgenstein, 1953; Wagner et al., 2003). This perspective
especially motivates the study of language emergence in cases where co-operative agents try to
achieve shared goals in game scenarios (Steels, 2003; Brighton & Kirby, 2006; Mordatch & Abbeel,
2017), and is related to the study of multi-agent and self-play methods that have found great success
in other areas of machine learning (Bansal et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017). Here we focus on simple
referential games, in which one agent must communicate to another a target object in the agent’s
environment.
One of the most important properties of natural language is compositionality. Smaller building
blocks (e.g. words, morphemes) are used to generate unbounded numbers of more complex forms
(e.g. sentences, multi-word expressions), with the meaning of the larger form being determined
by the meanings of its parts and how they are put together (Frege, 1892). Compositionality is an
advantage in any communication protocol as it allows in principle infinite expression through a finite
dictionary and a finite set of combination rules. In emergent communication research, previous work
has shown that agents can produce (somewhat) compositional protocols when engaging in language
games (Steels, 2003). However, the computational agents were typically situated in artificial worlds
containing just a handful of objects, represented as disentangled, structured, and sometimes even
atomic symbols, e.g. attribute-based or one-hot vectors (Batali, 1998; Brighton, 2002; Franke, 2015;
Andreas & Klein, 2017; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017). However, humans receive raw sensorimotor
* Corresponding author: angeliki@google.com
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
symbolic data
pixel data
CAT
SOFA
CAR
［建富夏I
冤::ag::ad
比 1哀】1
target
}distractors
SPeaker
liStener
Figure 1: High-level overview of the referential game.
target
rather than symbolic input, and little work to date has tested whether these findings carry over when
agents are situated in less idealized worlds that bear more similarity to the kind of entangled and
noisy environments to which humans are typically exposed.1
In this work, in the context of referential communication games (see Figure 1), we contrast the
results of two studies that lie at the extremes of how much structure is provided by the environment.
The first study (Section 3) focuses on symbolic representations, where objects are represented as
bags-of-attributes; this representation is inherently disentangled since dimensions encode individual
properties. The second study (Section 4) considers raw perceptual input, hence data that more
closely resembles what humans are exposed to. Clearly, the latter is a more challenging and realistic
scenario as the computational agents are operating on entangled inputs with no pre-coded semantics.
Crucially, both studies use the same referential game setup, the same learning procedure (policy
learning methods) and the same neural network agent architectures.
We show that reinforcement learning agents can successfully communicate, not only when pre-
sented with symbolic and highly structured input data, but (and more importantly) even when pre-
sented with raw pixel input. This result opens up the possibility of more realistic simulations of
language emergence. We successfully use the learning signal from the referential game to train
agents end-to-end, including cases where the agents need to perform visual processing of images
with a convolutional neural network. However, we find that the agents struggle to produce struc-
tured messages when presented with entangled input data (Bengio et al., 2013) due to the difficulty
of uncovering the true factors of variation, corroborating the hypothesis of Smith et al. (2003) that
structured (compositional) language is most likely to emerge when agents perceive the world as
structured.
2	Referential Games as Multi-agent co-operative
Reinforcement Learning
The referential game is implemented as an instance of multi-agent co-operative reinforcement learn-
ing, in which two agents take discrete actions in their environment in order to maximize a shared
reward.
2.1	Game and Terminology
The referential game is a variant of the Lewis signaling game (Lewis, 1969), which has been ex-
tensively used in linguistic and cognitive studies in the context of language evolution (e.g., Briscoe,
2002; Cangelosi & Parisi, 2002; Steels & Loetzsch, 2012; Spike et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2017).
1An exception is the recent work by Havrylov & Titov (2017), Evtimova et al. (2017) and Lazaridou et al.
(2017). However, the authors consider pre-trained visual input which already encodes semantics of the world
in the form of the presence of objects and their properties.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 1 provides a schematic description of our setup. First, a speaker is presented with a target
object (highlighted as CAR in the symbolic example on the left, and highlighted as the far right im-
age in the pixel example on the right). Then, by making use of an alphabet consisting of primitive
discrete symbols (“22”, “10”, “0”,“2”), the speaker constructs a message describing that object (“22
2 0”). We will refer to the set of all distinct messages generated by the speaker as their lexicon or
protocol. Finally, the listener is presented with the target and a set of distractor objects, and—by
making use of the speaker’s message—has to identify the target object from the set of candidate
objects. Communicative success is defined as the correct identification of the target by the listening
agent.
Formally, the attribute-based object vectors (disentangled) or the pixel-based images (entangled)
are the set of pre-linguistic items W = {o1 , . . . , oN}. From this set we draw a target t ∈ W and
subsequently K - 1 distractors D = {d1, . . . , dK-1} ⊂ W s.t. ∀j t 6= dj. The speaker has only
access to the target t, while the listener receives candidate set C = t ∪ D, not knowing which of the
elements in C is target t.
2.2	Agents
The speaker encodes t into a dense representation u using an encoder fS(t, θfS). The function of this
encoder depends on the type of pre-linguistic data used and is discussed separately for each study.
Given an alphabet A of discrete unit symbols (akin to words) and u, the speaker next generates
a discrete, variable-length, bounded message m by sampling symbols from a recurrent policy πS
defined by a decoder gS (u, θgS). The sequence generation is terminated either by the production
of a stop symbol or when the maximum length L has been reached. We implement the decoder
as a single-layer LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Note that the symbols in the agents’
alphabet A have no a priori meaning; rather, these symbols get grounded during the game.
The listening agent uses a similar encoder to the speaker but has independent network weights (θfL).
Applying this encoder to all candidate objects results in a set U = {fL (c, θfL ) | c ∈ C}. For
encoding the message m, we use a single-layer LSTM, denoted hL, which produces an encoding z:
z = hL (m, θhL).
Given encoded message z and candidates U, the listener predicts a target object t0 ∈ C following a
policy πL implemented using a non-parametric pointing module; this module samples the predicted
object from a Gibbs distribution computed via the dot product between vector z and all encoded
candidates u ∈ U . See Appendix B for information regarding the agents’ architecture.
At inference time, we replace the stochastic sampling of the speaker’s message and the listener’s
stochastic pointing module with deterministic processes. For the pointing module, the object with
the highest probability is chosen. For the speaker’s message, this is generated in a greedy fashion by
selecting the highest-probability symbol at each step.
2.3	Learning
All weights of the speaker and listener agents, θ = {θfS , θgS , θfL , θhL }, are jointly optimized while
playing the game. We emphasize that no weights are shared between the speaker and the listener,
and the only supervision used is communicative success, i.e. whether the listener identified the
correct target. The objective function that the two agents maximize for one training instance is:
R(t0) Xlogp(mlt|mt<l,u) + logp(ut0 |z, U)
where R is the reward function returning 1 if t = t0 (if the listener pointed to the correct target) and
0 otherwise. To maintain exploration in the speaker’s policy πS of generating a message, and the
listener’s policy πL of pointing to the target, we add to the loss an entropy regularization term (Mnih
et al., 2016). The parameters are estimated using the reinforce update rule (Williams, 1992). See
Appendix B for more details regarding the learning.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
max length	alphabet size	lexicon size	training accuracy	topographic ρ
2	10	31	92.0%	0.13
5	17	293	98.2%	0.16
10	40	355	98.5%	0.26
Table 1: Commumicative success (training accuracy in percentage) with varying maximum mes-
sage length. alphabet size denotes the effective size of the symbol set used from a maximum of 100.
lexicon size is the effective number of unique messages used. topographic ρ reports the structural
similarity in terms of Spearman ρ correlation between the message and the object vector space. All
Spearman ρ correlations throughout the paper are significant with p < 0.01.
3	Study 1: Referential game with symbolic data
We first present experiments where agents are learning to communicate when presented with struc-
tured and disentangled input. We use the Visual Attributes for Concepts Dataset (VisA) of Silberer
et al. (2013), which contains human-generated per-concept attribute annotations for 500 concrete
concepts (e.g., cat, sofa, car) spanning across different categories (e.g., mammals, furniture, vehi-
Cles), annotated with 636 general attributes (e.g., has Jail, is-black, has^wheels). We disregarded
homonym concepts (e.g., bat), thus reducing our working set of concepts to 463 and the number
of attributes to 573 (after eliminating any attribute that did not occur with the working concepts).
On average, each concept has 11 attributes. All pre-linguistic objects are represented in terms of
binary vectors o ∈ {0, 1}573. Note that these representations do carry some inherent structure; the
dimensions in the object vectors are disentangled and so each object can be seen as a conjunction of
properties. Speaker and listener convert the pre-linguistic representations to dense representations u
by using a single-layer MLP with a sigmoid activation function.
In all experiments, we set the number of candidate objects K to five, meaning there were four wrong
choices per correct one (resulting in a 20% random baseline). Inspired by Kottur et al. (2017), who
show that non-compositional language emerges in the case of overcomplete alphabets, we set the
size of alphabet A to 100 symbols, which is smaller than the size of the set of objects (463).
3.1	Agent Performance and Ambiguity
We first report model performance on the training data, comparing different settings for the maximal
allowed message length (2, 5 or 10 symbols). Results are presented in Table 1 (ignore the last row
topographic ρ which will be explained in later sections).
In the case of the shortest message settings (maximum length 2), our trained agents on average only
develop a protocol of 31 unique messages used to describe 363 training concepts (leaving aside 100
for testing). This indicates high levels of ambiguity, with each message being used to denote 11
concepts on average. Interestingly, recent findings suggest that ambiguity is a design feature of lan-
guage that prevents the inefficient use of redundant codes, since some of the message content can
be extracted from context: “the most efficient communication system will not convey information
already provided by the context” (Piantadosi et al., 2012). In our case, we do no explicitly encode
any bias towards ambiguity. We hypothesize that ambiguity arises due to the difficult exploration
problem that agents are faced with, in combination with the fact that ambiguous protocols present
a good local optimum that is over-represented in the hypothesis search space. As a result, in the
absence of environmental pressures (e.g., a high number of carefully constructed distractors) a sub-
optimal policy can still achieve a reasonably high accuracy (92%), making it even harder during
training to escape from such a solution.
In classic signaling games, this polysemy phenomenon manifests itself as different states receiving
the same signal and is termed partial pooling equilibrium (Skyrms, 2010). Perhaps rather counter-
intuitively, Skyrms (p.131) suggests that a way to obtain communication protocols that are robust
to this type of local communication minima is to allow the invention of new signals, essentially in-
creasing the search space of signals. Motivated by this suggestion, we play variants of the game in
which we allow the agents to produce messages of greater maximum length (5 and 10), which leads
to improved communicative success (98.2% and 98.5% respectively). We observe that the number
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 2: Training curves of different experimental setups with uniform and context-dependent
target selection.
of messages in the protocol increases from 31 to 293 and 355, respectively, reducing the average
number of concepts a message can denote from 11 concepts to (approximately) 1 concept.
3.2	Realistic context distribution
In the real world, when speakers refer to cats, listeners would likely be in a situation where they
had to discriminate a cat in the context of a couch or a dog, rather than in the context of a mirror
or a cow.2 Simply put, objects in the world do not appear in random contexts, but rather there is
regularity in the distribution of situational and visual co-occurrences. This property of the world
is typically not captured in referential games studied in the language emergence literature, with
distractors usually drawn from a uniform distribution.
We address this issue and design an additional experiment with distractors sampled from a target-
specific context distribution reflecting normalized object co-occurrence statistics. Co-occurrence
data is extracted from the mscoco caption dataset (Lin et al., 2014). This leads to more plausible
distractor sets with, for instance, the target goat more likely being mixed with sheep and cow as
distractors rather than bike or eggplant.
We find that the distractor selection process (uniform vs context-dependent) affects the language
learning dynamics; see Figure 2 for training curves for different experimental configurations. While
the non-uniform distractor sampling of the context-dependent setting can be exploited to learn a
degenerate strategy —giving up to 40% communicative success shortly after the start of training—
subsequently learning under this scenario takes longer. This effect is likely a combination of the
local minimum achieved by the degenerate strategy of picking a target at random from only the
topically relevant set of distractors, which initially makes the problem easier; however, the fact that
the co-occurrence statistics tend to align with the feature vectors, means that similar objects are more
likely to appear as distractors and hence the overall game becomes more difficult.
We now consider the question of how objects denoted by the same (ambiguous) message are related.
When the context is drawn uniformly, object similarity is a predictor of object confusability, as
similar objects tend to be mapped onto the same message (0.26 and 0.43 median pairwise cosine
similarities of objects that received the same message as computed on the VisA space, for maximum
message length 2 and 5, respectively). In the non-uniform case, we observe object confusability to
be less influenced by object similarity (0.15 and 0.17 median pairwise cosine similarities of objects
that received the same message, for maximum message length 2 and 5, respectively), but rather
driven by the visual context co-occurrences. Simply put, in the non-uniform case confusability is
less influenced by similarity since the agents must learn to distinguish between objects that naturally
co-occur (e.g. sheep and goat). Thus, the choice of distractors, an experimental design decision that
in existing language emergence literature has been neglected, has an effect on the organization (and
2This example reflects real co-occurrence statistics from caption data.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Data	length 2 lexicon size	acc.	length 5 lexicon size	acc.	length 10 lexicon size	acc.
training data	31	92.0	293	98.2	355	98.5
test data	1	74.2	70^^	76.8	98	81.6
unigram chimera	5	39.3	88	40.5	99	47.0
uniform chimera	3	31.2	87	32.2	100	42.6
Table 2: Communicative success (acc in percentage) of agents evaluated on training (first row) and
novel (last three rows) data. lexicon size column reports the percentage of novel messages (i.e.,
messages that were not used during the training).
potentially the naturalness) of the emerged language, for example as reflected in the semantics of
ambiguous or homonym words in the language.
3.3	Structural properties of emerged protocols
Quantifying the degree of compositionality and structure found in the emerged language is a chal-
lenging task; to the best of our knowledge, there is no formal mathematical definition of composi-
tionality that would allow for a definitive quantitative measure. Thus, research on this topic usually
relies on defining necessary requirements that any language claiming to be compositional should
adhere to, such as the ability to generalize to novel situations (Batali, 1998; Franke, 2015; Kottur
et al., 2017). We adopt a similar strategy by measuring the extent to which an emerged language
is able to generalize to novel objects (Section 3.3.1). Moreover, we also report quantitative results
(Section 3.3.2) using a measure of message structure proposed in the language evolution litera-
ture (Brighton & Kirby, 2006; Carr et al., 2017).
3.3.1	Generalization to novel objects
We perform experiments where trained agents from Section 3.1 are exposed to different types of
unseen objects, each of them differing to the degree to which the unseen objects resemble the objects
found in the training data. In the test scenario, objects come from the same data distribution as the
training data, but were not presented to the agents during training (e.g., a mouse); in the unigram
chimeras scenario, the novel objects are constructed by sampling properties from a property-based
distribution inferred from the training data, thus breaking any feature correlation (e.g., a mouse-
like animal with wheels); in the uniform chimeras scenario, the novel objects are constructed by
uniformly sampling properties (e.g., a square red furry metallic object).
Table 2 reports the communicative success. While there is a drop in performance for unseen objects,
agents are performing above random chance (20%). The emerged language is indeed able to gener-
alize to unseen objects; however, the degree of generalization is a function of the similarity between
the training and unseen objects, thus resulting in the uniform chimeras setting obtaining the lowest
performance.
Moreover, we observe examples of productivity, a key feature of compositionality. At test time,
speakers are able to concoct novel messages on-the-fly (i.e., messages that are not part of their
lexicon induced during training) to describe unseen objects. See the last three rows of Table 2,
and the lexicon size column, for the percentage of novel messages. Even though listeners were not
trained to associate novel messages with novel objects, they are still able comprehend such messages
and correctly identify the target object. In the test data and length 10 cases, novel messages account
for almost all of the generated messages, but with performance at 81.6%, providing evidence of the
structure found in the messages.
3.3.2	Topographic similarity
Given a set of objects, their meanings and the associated signals, Brighton & Kirby (2006) define
topographic similarity to be the correlation of the distances between all the possible pairs of mean-
ings and the corresponding pairs of signals. Figure 3 shows mappings between states and signals
for examples of holistic (b) and compositional (c,d) languages, with the topographic similarity of
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
(d)
• random speaker, Iength=IO
• trained speaker, Iengtti=IO
Cosine similarity
Figure 3: left: Three languages with different properties, taken from Brighton & Kirby (2006). The
mapping between states and signals shown in (b) is random; there is no relationship between points
in the meaning and signal space. In (c) and (d), similar meanings map to similar signals, i.e., there
is a topographic relation between meanings and signals. right: Relation between objects’ cosine
similarity and their message Levenshtein distance for trained and random agents.
compositional languages being higher than that of holistic. The intuition behind this measure is that
semantically similar objects should have similar messages.
To compute this measure, we first compute two lists of numbers: (i) the Levenshtein distances
between all pairs of objects’ messages; and (ii) the cosine similarity between all pairs of objects’
VisA vectors. Given these two lists, the topographic similarity is defined as their negative Spearman
ρ correlation (since we are correlating distances with similarities, negative values of correlation
indicate topographic similarity of the two spaces). Intuitively, if similar objects share much of the
message structure (e.g., common prefixes or suffixes), and dissimilar objects have little common
structure in their respective messages, then the topographic similarity should be high, the highest
possible value being 1.
Results presented back in Table 1, in the topographic ρ column, show that topographic similar-
ity is positive in all experimental setups, indicating that similar objects receive similar messages
(p < 0.01, permutation test). A qualitative analysis of the messages generated in the length 10
and training data cases showed that, for example, 32% of the mammal objects had as a message
prefix the bigram ‘95#10’; 36% of vehicle objects had ‘68#95’; and 11% of tool objects had ‘0#61’,
suggesting that these prefix bigrams encode category-specific information.
Next, for each object pair, we calculate their Levenshtein message distance and respective cosine
similarity, and plot in Figure 3 (right), for each distance, the average cosine similarities of the
pairs with that distance (this is done for the length 10 and training data experiment). We observe
that there is a clear relation between message similarity and meaning similarity (as measured by
overlap in the VisA properties). In Figure 3, we also plot a similar correlation curve for an emerged
language obtained by producing messages with randomly initialized and untrained speaker/listener
architectures. This emerged language is at random in terms of communicative success; however,
the generated messages do show signs of structure, since similar objects obtain somewhat similar
messages. This seems to suggest that structured and disentangled pre-linguistic representations
are, perhaps, a sufficient condition for the emergence of structured language, especially in neural
network-based agents which, due to the nature of representation and information flow, favor similar
inputs to trigger similar outputs.
4	Study 2: Referential game with raw pixel data
In this section, we present experiments in which agents receive as input entangled data in the
form of raw pixel input, and have to learn to perform visual conceptual processing guided by the
communication-based reward.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
We use a synthetic dataset of scenes consisting of geometric objects generated using the MuJoCo
physics engine (Todorov et al., 2012). We generate RGB images of resolution 124 × 124 depicting
single object scenes. For each object, we pick one of eight colors (blue, red, white, black, yellow,
green, cyan, magenta) and five shapes (box, sphere, cylinder, capsule, ellipsoid) resulting in 40
combinations, for each of which we generate 100 variations, varying the floor color and the object
location in the image. Moreover, we introduce different variants of the game: game A with 19
distractors; game B with 1 distractor; game C with 1 distractor, and with speaker and listener having
different viewpoints of the target object (the target object on the listener’s side is in a different
location); game D with 1 distractor, with speaker and listener having different viewpoints, and with
balanced numbers of shapes and color (obtained by downsampling from 8 colors to 5 and removing
any image containing objects of the 3 disregarded objects). For each game, we create train and test
splits with proportions 75/25 (i.e., 3000/1000 for games A and B, and 1850/650 for games C and
D).
Pre-linguistic objects are presented in the form of pixel input, o ∈ [0, 255]3×124×124. Speaker and
listener convert the images o to dense representations u, each of them using an 8-layer convolutional
neural network (ConvNet). Crucially, we do not pre-train the ConvNets on an object classification
task; the only learning signal is the communication-based reward. Despite this fact, we observe that
the lower layers of the ConvNets are encoding similar information to a ConvNet pre-trained on Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009).3 Conceptually, we can think of the whole speaker/listener architecture as
an encoder-decoder with a discrete bottleneck (the message). Given our initial positive findings, this
reward-based learning signal induced from the communication game setup could be used for class-
agnostic large-scale ConvNet training. Moreover, we find that, even though no weights were shared,
the agents’ conceptual spaces get aligned at different levels, reminiscent of theories of interactive
conceptual alignment during dialogue (Garrod & Pickering, 2004) (see Appendix A for the related
experiment).
4.1	Communicative success and emergent protocols
Unlike the experiments of Section 3, where agents start from disentangled representations, start-
ing from raw perceptual input presents a greater challenge: the agents have to establish naming
conventions about scenes, while at the same time learning to process the input with their own visual
conceptual system. Since we do not pre-train their ConvNets on an object recognition task, the dense
representations u used to derive the message contain no bias towards any image- or scene-specific
information (e.g, object color, shape or location). The extraction of visual properties is thus driven
entirely by the communication game. This contrasts with the cases of Havrylov & Titov (2017)
and Lazaridou et al. (2017) who use pre-trained visual vectors, and qualitatively observe that the
induced communication protocols encode information about objects. Table 3 presents the results in
terms of communicative train and test success (see Appendix C for additional experiments when
having access to gold object attribute classifiers). Moreover, we also report the topographic similar-
ity (column topographic ρ) between the symbolic attribute-based representations of scenes (floor
color, object color, shape and location) and the generated messages.
Overall, despite the challenges posed in this setup due to the raw nature of the data, performance
across all games is well above chance, indicating that reinforcement learning agents trained end-to-
end are able to establish a communication protocol in this grounded environment. In game A, the
agents reach 93.7% accuracy, with their lexicon consisting of 1068 messages, describing 3000 train-
ing objects. Most importantly, as captured by the positive topographic similarity, agents produce
messages that respect (even to a limited degree) the compositional nature of scenes (i.e., objects as
bags-of-attributes), indicating that similar scenes receive similar messages. Indeed, by examining
their protocol (see Table 4), we find that messages encode in a structurally consistent way informa-
tion about absolute location of objects, with the message prefix and suffix denoting the horizontal
and vertical co-ordinate, respectively. Interestingly, this communication strategy is also typically
followed by human players of referential games (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014).
3Specifically, for all 4000 images we compute two sets of activations, one derived from the speaker’s Con-
vNet and one from a pre-trained ResNet model (He et al., 2016). We then compute all pairwise cosines in the
speaker’s ConvNet and ResNet space and correlate these values. We find Spearman ρ to be in the range 0.6-0.7
between the first 3 layers of the speaker’s ConvNet and the ResNet.
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
game A
20 distractors
message prefix	3	5
Figure 4: Target images and their associated messages from game A and game B.
game B
game	distractors	balanced	viewpoints	lexicon size	random	train	test	topographic ρ
A	20	No	No	1068	5.0	93.7	93.6	0.13
B	2	No	No	13	50.0	93.2	93.4	0.006
C	2	No	Yes	8	50.0	86.0	85.7	0.07
D	2	Yes	Yes	5	50.0	90.4	89.9	0.06
Table 3: Communicative success of agents playing different games. Columns random, train and
test report percentage accuracies. Column topographic ρ reports the topographic similarity between
the symbolic representation of scenes and the generated messages (p < 0.01, permutation test).
However, we find the emerged protocols to be very unstable and too grounded in the specific game
situation. Small modifications of the game setup, while having close to no negative impact on the
communicative performance, can radically alter the form, semantics and interpretability of the com-
munication protocol. In game B, performance remains at the same level (93.2%) as game A. How-
ever, we observe that the protocol consists of 13 unique messages which do not reflect the objects’
attributes (as indicated by the close to zero topographic similarity), thus making the messages harder
to interpret (see Figure 4 for randomly sampled examples). When we change the viewpoint of the
agents in game C, biasing them against communicating about absolute object location, the players
derive a compact communication protocol consisting of 8 unique messages that describe primarily
color. Finally, when color and shape are balanced, as in game D, we still observe a bias towards
describing the color of objects, with the five induced messages providing a perfect clustering of the
objects according to their colors.4
In an entangled world, agents do not possess a priori visual biases and knowledge of concepts.
Since objects can be conceptualized in indefinitely many ways, the type of information encoded in
the messages is tied to the environmental pressures; communication behaviour is a function of the
environment, which also dictates what data structures can emerge. The implication of this obser-
vation is that protocols essentially overfit to the particular game situation, to the degree that they
become specialized ad-hoc naming conventions.
Interestingly, the emergence of ad-hoc naming conventions has also been observed during human-
human interaction: when participants engage in some specific game situation (e.g., communicating
about abstract tangram shapes), they tend to form highly specialized naming conceptions (concep-
tual pacts) that allow them to communicate with maximum efficiency (Brennan & Clark, 1996).
While in this study we do not address the issue of how a stable and general language could emerge
in entangled worlds, we believe that to alleviate the formation of such ad-hoc communication pro-
tocols, it is essential to increase the complexity of the games as well as requiring transfer across a
variety of games.
4Overall, results with reinforce in these non-stationary multi-agent environments (where speakers and
listeners are learning at the same time from raw pixels) show instability, and (as expected) some of the experi-
mental runs did not converge. However, we observed that the stability of the nature of the protocol (rather than
its existence) is mostly influenced by the configuration of the game itself, i.e., how constrained the message
space is.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
game (random baseline)	object position (20.0)	object shape (20.0)	object color (12.0)	floor color (33.0)
A	95.3	90.2	24.7	36.4
B	88.6	41.2	63.8	45.4
C	85.9	43.5	65.8	43.8
D	89.4	47.1	82.0	42.3
Table 4: Accuracy of probe linear classifiers of speaker’s induced visual representations (all accura-
cies are in percentage format).
4.2	Probe models
In order to investigate what information gets captured by the speaker’s ConvNet, we probe the
inferred visual representations u used to derive the message. Specifically, we design 4 probe clas-
sifiers for the color and shape of the object; object position which is derived by discretizing each
co-ordinate into 3 bins; and floor color which is obtained by clustering the RGB color representation
of the floor. For each probe, we performed 5-fold cross validation with a linear classifier, and report
accuracy results in Table 4. Overall, different games result in visual representations with different
predictive power; object position is almost always encoded in the speaker’s visual representation,
even in situations where location of the object is not a good strategy for communication. On the
other hand, object shape seems to provide less salient information, despite the fact that it is relevant
for communication, at least in the C&D games.
As expected, the structure and semantics of the emergent protocols are a function of the information
captured in the visual representations. The degree to which the agents are able to pull apart the
objects’ factors of variation impacts their ability to communicate about those factors, with the most
extreme case being game D, where the message ignores the shape entirely. Thus, disentanglement
seems to be a necessary condition for communication, at least in the case of pixel input.
5	Conclusion
We presented a series of studies investigating the properties of protocols emerging when reinforce-
ment learning agents are trained end-to-end on referential communication games. We found that
when agents are presented with disentangled input data in the form of attribute vectors, this inherent
compositional structure is successfully retained in the output. Moreover, we showed that commu-
nication can also be achieved in cases where agents are presented with raw pixel data, a type of
input that aligns better with the raw sensorimotor data that humans are exposed to. At the same
time, we found that their ability to form compositional protocols in these cases is hampered by their
ability to pull apart the objects’ factors of variations. Altogether, we were able to successfully scale
up traditional research from the language evolution literature on emergent communication tasks to
the contemporary deep learning framework, thus opening avenues to more realistic, and large scale,
computational simulations of language emergence with complex image stimuli.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Murray Shanahan, Laura Rimell and Gabor Melis for their very helpful
feedback on this paper, as well as the rest of the DeepMind language team for many discussions.
AL would also like to thank Marco Baroni and Alex Peysakhovich for the email correspondence and
discussions from a year ago, which provided inspiration for some of the experiments on this paper.
References
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. Analogs of linguistic structure in deep representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.08139, 2017.
Trapit Bansal, Jakub Pachocki, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, and Igor Mordatch. Emergent com-
plexity via multi-agent competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03748, 2017.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
John Batali. Computational simulations of the emergence of grammar. pp. 405-426, 1998.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798-1828,
2013.
Susan E Brennan and Herbert H Clark. Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6):1482, 1996.
Henry Brighton. Compositional syntax from cultural transmission. Artificial life, 8(1):25-54, 2002.
Henry Brighton and Simon Kirby. Understanding linguistic evolution by visualizing the emergence
of topographic mappings. Artificial life, 12(2):229-242, 2006.
Ted Briscoe (ed.). Linguistic evolution through language acquisition. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2002.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Angelo Cangelosi and Domenico Parisi (eds.). Simulating the evolution of language. Springer, New
York, 2002.
Jon W Carr, Kenny Smith, Hannah Cornish, and Simon Kirby. The cultural evolution of structured
languages in an open-ended, continuous world. Cognitive science, 41(4):892-923, 2017.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009.
IEEE Conference on, pp. 248-255. IEEE, 2009.
Katrina Evtimova, Andrew Drozdov, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. Emergent language in a
multi-modal, multi-step referential game. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10369, 2017.
Michael Franke. The evolution of compositionality in signaling games. Journal of Logic, Language
and Information, pp. 1-23, 2015.
Gottlob Frege. Uber Sinn Und Bedeutung. Zeitschrftfur Philosophie Und Philosophische Kritik,
100:25-50, 1892.
Simon Garrod and Martin J Pickering. Why is conversation so easy? Trends in cognitive sciences,
8(1):8-11, 2004.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to com-
municate with sequences of symbols. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.11192, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
770-778, 2016.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Felix Hill, Simon Green, Fumin Wang, Ryan Faulkner, Hubert Soyer, David
Szepesvari, Wojtek Czarnecki, Max Jaderberg, Denis Teplyashin, et al. Grounded language learn-
ing in a simulated 3d world. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06551, 2017.
Sepp Hochreiter and JUrgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
1735-1780, 1997.
Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara L Berg. Referitgame: Referring to
objects in photographs of natural scenes. In EMNLP, pp. 787-798, 2014.
Satwik Kottur, Jose MF Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Natural language does not
emerge’naturally’in multi-agent dialog. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08502, 2017.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and the
emergence of (natural) language. In ICLR, 2017.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
David Lewis. Convention. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1969.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
Dollar, and C LaWrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
conference on computer vision, pp. 740-755. Springer, 2014.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928-1937, 2016.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04908, 2017.
Martin A NoWak and David C Krakauer. The evolution of language. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 96(14):8028-8033, 1999.
Steven T Piantadosi, Harry Tily, and EdWard Gibson. The communicative function of ambiguity in
language. Cognition, 122(3):280-291, 2012.
Carina Silberer, Vittorio Ferrari, and Mirella Lapata. Models of semantic representation With visual
attributes. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 572-582, Sofia, Bulgaria, August 2013. Association for
Computational Linguistics. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P13-1056.
David Silver, Julian SchrittWieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, MattheW Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
the game of go Without human knoWledge. Nature, 550:354-359, 2017.
Brian Skyrms. Signals: Evolution, learning, and information. Oxford University Press, 2010.
Kenny Smith, Simon Kirby, and Henry Brighton. Iterated learning: A frameWork for the emergence
of language. Artificial life, 9(4):371-386, 2003.
MattheW Spike, Kevin Stadler, Simon Kirby, and Kenny Smith. Minimal requirements for the emer-
gence of learned signaling. Cognitive Science, 2016. In press.
Luc Steels. Social language learning. In Mario Tokoro and Luc Steels (eds.), The Future of Learning,
pp. 133-162. IOS, Amsterdam, 2003.
Luc Steels and Martin Loetzsch. The grounded naming game. In Luc Steels (ed.), Experiments in
Cultural Language Evolution, pp. 41-59. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2012.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 5026-
5033. IEEE, 2012.
Kyle Wagner, James A Reggia, Juan Uriagereka, and Gerald S Wilkinson. Progress in the simulation
of emergent communication and language. Adaptive Behavior, 11(1):37-69, 2003.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-folloWing algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning. Mach. Learn., 8(3-4):229-256, May 1992. ISSN 0885-6125. doi: 10.1007/
BF00992696. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992696.
LudWig Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations. BlackWell, Oxford, UK, 1953. Translated by
G.E.M. Anscombe.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
A Conceptual alignment of speaker and listener
During conversation, communication allows interlocutors to achieve interactive conceptual align-
ment (Garrod & Pickering, 2004). We are able to communicate because we have established a
common ground and our representations at different levels become aligned (e.g., participants mu-
tually understand that “he” in the conversation refers to Bob). We investigated whether the agents’
conceptual systems achieve a similar structural alignment. We measure the alignment in terms of
Spearman ρ correlation of the intra-agent pairwise object cosine similarities as calculated via repre-
senting objects as activations from ConvNet layers.
Interestingly, we observe a gradual increase in the structural similarity as we represent the objects
with layer activations closer to the pixel space. Conceptual spaces are more aligned the closer they
are to the raw pixel input (ρ = 0.97-0.91, depending on the game) and become more dissimilar
as the representations become more abstract. We can draw the analogy to language processing, as
first ConvNet layers perform some low-level processing analogous to phoneme recognition or word
segmentation (and are thus more objective) while higher layers perform more abstract processing,
vaguely analogous to semantics and pragmatics (thus, represent more subjective knowledge). In
cases of successful communication, speakers’ and listeners’ conceptual spaces closer to the commu-
nication point are structurally very similar (ρ = 0.85-0.62, depending on the game), however this
similarity drops dramatically in cases of failure of communication (ρ = 0.15).
B Hyperparameter details
All LSTM hidden states of the “speaking” and “listening” module as well and the “seeing” pre-
linguistic feed-forward encoders (see Section 3), have dimension 50. The “seeing” pre-linguistic
ConvNet encoders (see Section 4) has 8 layers, 32 filters with the kernel size 3 for every layer and
with strides [2, 1, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2] for each layer. We use ReLU as activation function as well as batch
normalization for every layer.
For learning, we used the Rmsprop optimizer, with learning rate 0.0001. We use a separate value
of entropy regularization for each policy. For πS we use 0.01 and for πL we use 0.001. We use a
mini-batch of 32.
C Communicative success using gold attribute classifiers
We assume a model which has access to perfect attribute classifiers for color, shape and object
position, for the latter using a classifier operating on the discretized annotations we obtained in
Section 4.2 after quantazing the real-valued object location. For computing the performance of
this model using gold attribute classifiers, we first remove from the distractors any candidate not
matching the target’s attributes and them pick at random. We repeat this experiment for single
attribute classifiers and their pairwise combinations. Table 5 reports the communicative success
results obtained empirically by averaging across 1000 simulations, alongside the training and test
accuracies of the trained agents of Section 4.1 for comparison.
game	train	test Il color		shape	position	color & shape	position & shape	position & color
A	93.7	93.6	37.2	24.8	69.3	80.4	92.1	95.6
B	93.2	93.4	93.2	90.1	97.2	98.8	99.3	99.4
C	86.0	85.7	93.2	90.1	-	98.8	-	-
D	90.4	89.9	89.6	89.2	-	98.5	-	-
Table 5: Communicative success of trained models from Section 4.1 (train and test) as well as
models with access to gold classifiers. All accuracies are in percentage format.
13