Figure 1: Proactive contact tracing overview. Diagram showing Left: the propagation ofanonymized, graded (non-binary) risk messages between users and Inset: overview of the inferencemodule deployed to each user’s phone. The inference module for agent i takes in observables Oi, anduses a pretrained predictor f to estimate that agent’s risk (expected infectiousness) for each of thelast 14 days. Anonymized selected elements of this risk vector are sent as messages to appropriatecontacts, allowing them to proactively update their own estimate of expected infectiousness.
Figure 2: PCT model architecture. Diagram showing Left: The embedding network combiningpre-existing conditions O, day offsets O, risk message clusters O O, and symptoms information Oto be fed into a stack of 5 either Deep-Set (DS) or Set Transformer (ST) blocks O. Right-top: (ST)self-attention block featuring Multi-Head Dot Product Attention (MHDPA), Fully-Connected layerswith ReLU (FC + R) and residual connections. Right-bottom: (DS) set processing block. Here, the0 denotes concatenation and the ㊉ addition operation.
Figure 3: Pareto frontier of mobility and disease spread: reproduction number R as a functionof mobility. In boxes, average difference +/- standard error, p-value under null hypothesis of nodifference. Note that small differences in R over time produce large changes to the number of cases.
Figure 4: Left: Cumulative case counts for each method, 60% adoption, 50 days, with all runsnormalized to 5.61 ± 0.5 effective contacts per day per agent. Right: Mobility restriction for thesame experiments (fraction of quarantines). Gist: For a similar number of cumulative cases to otherDCT methods (left), PCT methods impose very little mobility restriction (right), close to NT.
Figure 5:	Method Comparison and Retraining. Left: Distribution (median and quartiles) of Rat 60% adoption Where the ML methods outperform the Heuristic and BCT methods proposed byGupta et al. (2020). Right: Iterative re-training significantly improves model performance. Upon thesecond re-training, hoWever, it seems that ST-PCT begins to overfit.
Figure 6:	Adoption rate comparison. We compare all methods for adoption rates between 0% (NT)and 60%. Gist: All methods are able to improve over NT, even at low adoption rates. At 30% and45%, ST-PCT performs the best by a relatively wide margin while DS-PCT outperforms it at 60%.
Figure 7: Motivating example comparing manual, binary, and proactive contact tracing: Thisexample shows the potential effectiveness of early warnings in controlling the spread of the infection.
Figure 8: Effective Viral Load [Reproduced with permission from Gupta et al. (2020)]: Schematicshowing the viral load curve, and associated phases of symptoms with severity indicators: infectious-ness onset occurs on average 2.5 days after exposure, viral load peaks 0.7 days before symptom onset,which occurs an average of 5 incubation days after exposure. Symptoms are most severe after viralload peak and symptom onset, when the virus has had time to infect many cells. Recovery takes onaverage 14 days from symptom onset.
