Figure 1: MUSIC Algorithm: We update the estimator to better predict the MI, and update theagent to control the surrounding state to have higher MI with the agent state.
Figure 2: Fetch robot arm manipulation tasks in OpenAI Gym and a navigation taskbased on the Gazebo simulator: FetchPush, FetchPickAndPlace, FetchSlide,SocialBot-PlayGround.
Figure 3: Experimental resultsmetric. The experimental results are shown in Figure 3 (left). The y-axis represents the mean taskreward and the x-axis denotes the training epochs. Figure 3 (right) shows that the MUSIC rewardsignal I(Sa, Ss) is relatively strong compared to the Empowerment reward signal I(A, Ss). Subse-quently, high MI reward encourages the agent to explore more states with higher MI. A theoreticalconnection between Empowerment and MUSIC is shown in Appendix B. The video starting from1:28 shows the learned navigation behaviors.
Figure 4: Mean success rate with standard deviation: The percentage values after colon (:) rep-resent the best mean success rate during training. The shaded area describes the standard deviation.
Figure 5: Performance comparison: We compare the MUSIC variants, including MUSIC-f,MUSIC-r, and MUSIC-p, with DIAYN, VIME, and PER, respectively. A full comparison is shownin Appendix D Figure 10.
Figure 7: MUSIC rewards over a trajectoryment of the object and the gripper (see the 3rd, 9th, and 10th frame). When there is no contactbetween the gripper and the cube (see the 1st & 2nd frames), or the gripper holds the object still(see the 6th to 8th frames) the intrinsic reward remains nearly zero. From this example, we see thatMUSIC distributes positive intrinsic rewards when the surrounding state has correlated changes withthe agent state.
Figure 8: Learned Control behaviors with MUSIC: Without any reward, MUSIC enables theagent to learn control behaviors, such as reaching, pushing, sliding, and picking up an object. Thelearned behaviors are shown in the supplementary video.
Figure 9: Mean success rate with standard deviation: The percentage values after colon (:) rep-resent the best mean success rate during training. The shaded area describes the standard deviation.
Figure 10: Performance comparison: We compare the MUSIC variants, including MUSIC-f,MUSIC-r, and MUSIC-p, with DIAYN, VIME, and PER, respectively.
