Figure 1: RNN Conditioned Real NVP modelschematic at time t, consisting of K blocks ofcoupling layers and Batch Normalization, where ineach coupling layer we condition Xt and its trans-formations on the state of a shared RNN from theprevious time step Xt-1 and current time covari-ates ct which are typically time dependent andtime independent features.
Figure 2: Transformer Conditioned Real NVPmodel schematic consisting of an encoder-decoderstack where the encoder takes in some contextlength of time series and then uses it to generateconditioning for the prediction length portion ofthe time series via a causally masked decoder stack.
Figure 3: System of pipes with liquid flowing fromleft to right with sensors (Si) and valves (Vi).
Figure 4:	Estimated (cross-)covariance matrices. Darker means higher positive values. left: Co-variance matrix for a fixed time point capturing the correlation between S1 and S2 . right: Cross-covariance matrix between consecutive time points capturing true flow of liquid in the pipe system.
Figure 5:	Visual analysis of the dependency structure extrapolation of the model. Left: Cross-covariance matrix computed from the test split of Traffic benchmark. Middle: Cross-covariancematrix computed from the mean of 100 sample trajectories drawn from the Transformer-MAFmodel’s extrapolation into the future (test split). Right: The absolute difference of the two matricesmostly shows small deviations between ground-truth and extrapolation.
Figure 6:	Point forecast and test set ground-truth from LSTNet multivariate model for Trafficdata of the first 16 of 963 time series. CRPSsum: 0.125, CRPS: 0.202 and MSE: 7.4 × 10-4.
Figure 7:	Point forecast and test set ground-truth from N-BEATS univariate model for Trafficdata of the first 16 of 963 time series. CRPSsum: 0.174, CRPS: 0.228 and MSE: 8.4 × 10-4.
Figure 8:	Prediction intervals and test set ground-truth from LSTM-REAL-NVP model for Trafficdata of the first 16 of 963 time series.
Figure 9:	Prediction intervals and test set ground-truth from Transformer-MAF model forTraffic data of the first 16 of 963 time series.
Figure 10: Prediction intervals and test set ground-truth from LSTM-REAL-NVP model forElectricity data of the first 16 of 370 time series.
Figure 11: Prediction intervals and test set ground-truthElectricity data of the first 16 of 370 time series.
