Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Mind the Gap: Domain Gap Control for Single
Shot Domain Adaptation for Generative Ad-
versarial Networks
Peihao Zhu
Rameen Abdal
John Femiani
Peter Wonka
KAUST	KAUST
Miami University	KAUST
Figure 1: One-shot domain adaptation: (left) a single reference image from domain B is used to
refine a GAN GA to learn GB ; (center) every image in domain A has an analog in domain B that
shares a latent code and many salient attributes; (right) because salient attributes are preserved in the
new domain, many latent-edits are meaningful in the new domain.
Abstract
We present a new method for one shot domain adaptation. The input to our method
is a trained GAN that can produce images in domain A and a single reference
image IB from domain B . The proposed algorithm can translate any output of the
trained GAN from domain A to domain B . There are two main advantages of our
method compared to the current state of the art: First, our solution achieves higher
visual quality, e.g. by noticeably reducing overfitting. Second, our solution allows
for more degrees of freedom to control the domain gap, i.e. what aspects of the
image IB are used to define the domain B . Technically, we realize the new method
by building on a pre-trained StyleGAN generator as GAN and a pre-trained CLIP
model for representing the domain gap. We propose several new regularizers for
controlling the domain gap to optimize the weights of the pre-trained StyleGAN
generator so that it will output images in domain B instead of domain A. The
regularizers prevent the optimization from taking on too many attributes of the
single reference image. Our results show significant visual improvements over the
state of the art as well as multiple applications that highlight improved control1.
1	Introduction
We propose a new method for domain adaptation based on a single target image. As shown in Fig. 1,
given a trained GAN for domain A, and a single image IB from domain B , our approach learns to
find a corresponding image in domain B for any image in domain A. We can achieve this by fine-
tuning the GAN for domain A to obtain a second GAN that generates images in domain B . The two
GANs share a latent space so that a single latent code will generate two corresponding images, one
in domain A and one in domain B . The main selling point of our method is that it achieves superior
quality than the state of the art in single shot domain adaption. Our method is computationally
lightweight and only takes a few minutes on a single GPU, so that it can be widely applied.
In order to do this, we leverage multiple existing components, including two excellent pre-trained
networks: First, we use StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020b) as a pre-trained GAN. A follow-up ver-
sion has been published on arXiv (Karras et al., 2021), but the code only became available after we
1Code is available at https://zpdesu.github.io/MindTheGap.
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
finished all experiments. Second, we use a pre-trained network for image embedding, CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), to encode images as vectors. Third, we use the pioneering idea of StyleGAN-
NADA (Gal et al., 2021), which builds upon StyleCLIP (Patashnik et al., 2021), to encode a domain
gap (or domain shift) as vector in CLIP embedding space. Fourth, we leverage II2S (Zhu et al.,
2020b) as GAN embedding method to transfer image IB into domain A to obtain a better estimation
of the domain gap.
Even though the visual quality of StyleGAN-NADA is already impressive when used as a single
image domain adaption method, we identified multiple technical issues that can be improved to
achieve another large jump in visual quality. First, and most importantly, StyleGAN-NADA was
designed for zero-shot domain adaptation, and does not have a good solution to model the domain
gap based on a single example image. Their reference implementation models the domain gap as
a vector from the average image in domain A to the given image IB in CLIP embedding space.
However, this leads to overfitting in practice and the transfer results lose attributes of the input
images, so that input images from domain A get mapped to images that are all too similar to IB in
domain B . We identify a better solution to this problem. In fact, the domain gap should be modeled
as a vector from the image IB to its analog in domain A, so that the image in domain A shares salient
within-domain attributes with the reference image. We therefore need to solve an inverse B-to-A
domain-transfer problem, which we propose to tackle using the state-of-the-art GAN embedding
method II2S (Zhu et al., 2020b). A key insight is that we can use a heavily regularized version of
the II2S GAN inversion method to do the reverse problem of transferring any related image (from a
domain B) into the domain A, helping to characterize the semantic domain gap better than previous
work. Further extensions enable us to fine tune the modeling of the domain gap to explicitly model
which attributes of the input image should be kept. Second, we propose multiple new regularizers
to improve the quality. Third, we propose a technical improvement to the heuristic layer selection
proposed in StyleGAN-NADA that is more straightforward and robust.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1.	We reduce the mode collapse/overfitting problem which often occurs in one-shot and few-
shot domain adaptation. Our results look similar to the target domain images with fewer
artifacts. These results are also faithful to the identities of the source domain images and
able to capture fine details.
2.	Our domain adaptation provides more freedom to control the “similarity” between im-
ages across domains that share a common latent-code, which makes a large number of
downstream applications possible, e.g., pose adaptation, lighting adaptation, expression
adaptation, texture adaptation, interpolation, and layer mixing, using state-of-the-art image
editing frameworks.
2	Related Work
Domain adaptation. Domain adaptation is the task of adapting a model to different domains.
Different works in this area (Bousmalis et al., 2016; 2017; Na et al., 2020; Wang & Breckon, 2020;
Kang et al., 2019) try to learn diverse domain independent representations using the source domain
to make predictions, such as image classification, in the target domains. More importantly, gen-
erating diverse representations of images by combining natural language supervision has been of
interest to the computer vision and NLP research communities (Frome et al., 2013). Recently, Ope-
nAI’s Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) work established that
transformer, and large datasets, could generate transferable visual models. In CLIP, both images and
text are represented by high dimensional semantic-embedding vectors, which can then be used for
zero-shot learning.
GAN-based domain adaptation. In the GAN domain, various models and training strategies have
been proposed for few-shot domain adaptation tasks (Bousmalis et al., 2017; ZHANG et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019). Most relevant to our work, the domain adaptation methods (Patashnik
et al., 2021; Gal et al., 2021; Jang et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021) that build upon StyleGAN (Kar-
ras et al., 2019; 2020b;a) demonstrate impressive visual quality and semantic interpretability in the
target domain. These methods can be broadly classified into few-shot and single-shot domain adap-
tation methods.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A notable few-shot method, StyleGAN-ADA (Karras et al., 2020a) proposes an adaptive discrimi-
nator augmentation method to train StyleGAN on limited data. Another work, DiffAug (Zhao et al.,
2020), applies differentiable transformations to the real and generated images for robust training. A
discriminator related approach, FreezeD (Mo et al., 2020), freezes lower layers of the discrimina-
tor to achieve domain adaptation. Toonify (justinpinkney/toonify) interpolates between the model-
weights of different generators to generate samples from a novel domain. A more recent work (Ojha
et al., 2021), reduces overfitting on limited data by preserving the relative similarities and differences
in the instances of samples in the source domain using cross domain correspondence.
Latent space interpretation and semantic editing. GAN interpretation and understanding of the
latent space has been a topic of interest since the advent of GANs. Some notable works in this
domain (BaU et al., 2018; 2019; Harkonen et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Tewari et al., 2020a)
have led to many GAN-based image editing applications. More recent studies into the activation
space of StyleGAN have demonstrated that the GAN can be exploited for downstream tasks like
UnsUpervised and few-shot part segmentation (Zhang et al., 2021; Tritrong et al., 2021; Abdal et al.,
2021a; Collins et al., 2020; Bielski & Favaro, 2019), extracting 3D models of the objects (Pan et al.,
2021; Chan et al., 2020) and other semantic image editing applications (ZhU et al., 2021; Tan et al.,
2020; WU et al., 2020; Patashnik et al., 2021).
Image embedding is one of the approaches Used to stUdy the interpretability of the GANs. To enable
the semantic editing of a given image Using GANs, one needs to embed/project the image into its
latent space. Image2StyleGAN (Abdal et al., 2019) embeds images into the extended StyleGAN
space called W+ space. Some followUp works (ZhU et al., 2020a; Richardson et al., 2020; Tewari
et al., 2020b) introdUce regUlarizers and encoders to keep the latent code faithfUl to the original
space of the StyleGAN. Improved-Image2StyleGAN (II2S) (ZhU et al., 2020b) Uses PN space to
regUlarize the embeddings for high-qUality image reconstrUction and image editing. We Use this
method to embed real images into the StyleGAN and show that oUr domain adaptation preserves the
properties of the original StyleGAN in Sec 4.
Image editing is another tool to identify the concepts learned by a GAN. In the StyleGAN do-
main, recent works (Harkonen et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Tewari et al., 2020a; Abdal et al.,
2021b) extract meaningfUl linear and non-linear paths in the latent space. InterfaceGAN (Shen
et al., 2020) finds linear directions to edit latent-codes in a sUpervised manner. On the other hand,
GANSPace (Harkonen et al., 2020) extracts unsupervised linear directions for editing using PCA
in the W space. Another framework, StyleRig (Tewari et al., 2020a), maps the latent space of the
GAN to a 3D model. StyleFlow (Abdal et al., 2021b) extracts non-linear paths in the latent space to
enable sequential image editing. In this work, we will use StyleFlow to test the semantic editing of
our domain adapted images.
In the area of text-based image editing, StyleCLIP (Patashnik et al., 2021) extends CLIP to perform
GAN-based image editing. StyleCLIP uses the CLIP embedding vector to traverse the StyleGAN
manifold, by adjusting the latent-codes of a GAN, in order to make a generated image’s CLIP em-
bedding similar to the target vector, while remaining close to the input in latent space. A downside
to this approach is that these edits are unable to shift the domain of a GAN outside its original man-
ifold. However, their use of CLIP embeddings inspired StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021), which
creates a new GAN using refinement learning to do zero-shot domain adaptation. Although unpub-
lished, they also demonstrate one-shot domain adaptation in their accompanying code. The original
and target domain are represented by CLIP text embeddings. The difference of the embeddings
represents a direction used to shift the domains. Although in the accompanying source-code (ri-
nongal/StyleGAN NADA), they use a bootstrap-estimate of the mean CLIP image embedding of
the original domain, and use a reference image or its CLIP image embedding to represent the new
domain.
3	Method
Our approach involves fine-tuning a GAN trained for some original domain A, e.g. FFHQ faces,
to adapt it to a new related domain B . In our approach, the images in A and the images in B are
related to each-other by a common latent code. Any image which can be generated or embedded
in domain A can be transferred to a corresponding and similar image in B. We use the CLIP
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
embeddings as a semantic-space in order to model the difference between domains A and B, and
we use StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2018; 2020b) as the image generator. A key to our approach is
to preserve directions within and across domains as illustrated in Fig. 3. Before fine-tuning the
GAN for domain A (to obtain the GAN for domain B), we determine a domain-gap direction. This
direction, called vref, is a vector in CLIP embedding space which points towards a reference image
IB which is in domain B from its corresponding image IA in which is in domain A. We use the
CLIP image-embedding model EI to find
vref = EI(IB) - EI(IA).
(1)
Finding IA in domain A for a given image in domain B is a significant limitation in the current state
of the art, StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021), as they use the mean of domain A. The mean of
domain A is a very crude approximation for IA . Instead, we propose an inverse domain adaption
step, by projecting the image IB into the domain A to find a sample that is more similar and specific
to the reference image than the mean of domain A. In principle, this problem is also a domain
adaption problem similar to the problem we are trying to solve, just in the inverse direction. The
major difference is that we have a pre-trained GAN available in domain A.
We use the II2S GAN-inversion method (Zhu et al., 2020b) in order to find a latent code for an
image similar to IB that is plausibly within domain A. The I2S and II2S methods use an extended
version of W space from StyleGAN2. The W code is used 18 times, once for each style block
in StyleGAN2. When allowing each element to vary independently, the resulting latent space is
called W+ space Abdal et al. (2019; 2020); Zhu et al. (2020b). I2S showed that the additional
degrees of freedom allow GAN inversion for a wider set of images with very detailed reconstruction
capabilities, and II2S showed that an additional regularization term to keep the latent codes close to
their original distribution made latent-code manipulation more robust. II2S uses a hyperparameter,
λ, which can be increased in order to generate latent codes using more regularization, and therefore
in higher density regions of the W+ latent space. The effect of this parameter is shown in Fig. 2.
The value suggested in the original work was λ = 0.001, however, low values of lambda allow II2S
to find latent codes that are too far away from the latent-codes produced by the mapping network
of the original GAN and thus produce images that are less plausible to have come from domain A,
underestimating the gap between domains. In the context of domain shift we find it is useful to use
λ = 0.01 as illustrated in Fig. 2. The result is a latent code wref in W+ space which is shifted
towards a high-density portion of the domain A. Then the image generated from that code, IA , is an
image in domain A that corresponds to IB .
Figure 2: An illustration showing how II2S embeds IB in the original StyleGAN domain A, shown
for two different values of λ. Reference images from other domains are shown in the top row. The
value recommended by Zhu et al. (2020b) is shown in the second row, and the value used in this
work is shown in the third row. Although there is some subjectivity involved, we believe that the
large value λ = 1e-2 is needed for II2S to find images that plausibly could belong to the domain
A, which in this case is FFHQ faces.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Training As illustrated in Fig. 2, we use II2S to find an image IA which we consider to be similar
to IB but still Plausibly within a domain A. In PrinciPle, it is Possible that II2S finds IA so that IB is
similar enough to be considered the same, in which case the two domains overlaP. However, we are
concerned with the cases where the domains are different, and the vector Vref indicates the direction
of a gaP, or shift, between domain A and domain B . We use refinement learning to train a new
generator, GB, so that images generated from GB are shifted Parallel to Vref in CLIP sPace, relative
to images from GA . The desired shift is indicated by the red arrows in Fig. 3. During training, latent
codes W are generated using the maPPing network of StyleGAN2. Both GA and GB are used to
generate images from the same latent code, but the weights of GA are frozen and only GB is uPdated
during training. The goal of refinement learning is that GB will Preserve semantic information that
is within domain A but also that it will generate image shifted across a gaP between domains. When
refining the generator for domain B, we freeze the weights of the StyleGAN2 ‘ToRGB’ layers, and
the maPPing network is also frozen. The overall Process of training is illustrated in Fig. 4.
Figure 3: The vectors in the CLIP image embedding space, EI , which control domain adaptation.
Each domain is depicted here as a dashed outline; the vectors vref and vsamp cross between the two
domains and are used to refine a generator for domain B . Corresponding images should be shifted
in the same direction. The vectors vA and vB model important semantic differences within each
domain that should also be preserved by domain transfer. GA (w) and GB (w) are corresponding
images for an arbitrary latent-code w encountered during training. Style mixing (shown on the right)
shifts a part of the latent code towards the reference image effecting the result in both domains.
The goal of training is to shift CLIP embeddings from domain A in a direction parallel to vref. We
use the vector vsamp to represent the current domain shift of the network GB during training, on a
single sample. We have
vsamp = EI(GB (w)) - EI(GA(w))	(2)
as a cross-domain vector for corresponding images generated from the same w latent code using the
two generators. We use the loss
LcmacroSS = I- Sim(Vref, Vsamp),	⑶
where sim(a, b) = ：$/ is the cosine similarity score. This loss term is minimized when the
domain Shift vectorS are parallel.
It is important that the reference image IB matches the generated image, GB (wref), both in a se-
mantic sense, as measured by the similarity of the CLIP embeddings, and also in a visual sense.
We accomplish this using two losses: LrefdiP and Lrefj∙ec. The first loss measures the change in the
CLIP-embeddings of the original and reconstructed reference image,
LrefdiP = 1 - sim (EI(IB), EI(GB (wref))),	⑷
ensuring that the GB can reconstruct the embedding. Unlike LcliP_accross, this loss term is not based
on a change in embeddings between the two domains, instead it guides GB by aligning it to a global
embedding in CLIP sPace, ensuring that IB remains fixed in the domain of GB .
The second loss term is a reconstruction loss based on PercePtual and Pixel-level accuracy,
Lref-rec =LPIPS (IB, GB (Wref)) + L2 (IB, GB (Wref))	⑸
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
N Uses Gn	BEFORE TRAINING
Figure 4: A process diagram for domain transfer. White rectangles indicate calculations, computed
values are shown on the connecting lines. The four loss-calculations are indicated by blue rectangles,
and the learnable weights of StyleGAN2 (all weights except the mapping network and the ToRGB
layers) are indicated in green.
where LPIPS is the perceptual loss from Zhang et al. (2018), and L2 is the squared euclidean differ-
ence between pixels. The purpose of this loss is to ensure that the visual, and not just the semantic,
qualities of the image are preserved. This is necessary in addition to Lref-CIiP because, while the CLIP
embeddings do capture many semantic and visual qualities of the image, there are still many percep-
tually distinct images that could produce the same CLIP embedding. This is visible in Fig. 6, without
the reconstruction loss GB fails to preserve some important visual qualities (such as symmetry) of
the input.
There is a tendency for GANs to reduce the variation during training, especially in few-shot fine-
tuning. We combat this by preserving the semantic information that is not related to the domain
gap. A semantic change that is not related to the change in domains should not be affected by GB .
Therefore, the vector connecting the reference and sample images within the domain A should be
parallel to the corresponding vector in domain B. Let vA = EI (GA (w)) - EI (IA) be a vector
connecting a sample image with latent-code w to the reference image in the CLIP space. This vector
represents semantic changes that are within domain A, and we want the matching semantic changes
to occur within the domain B. Let vB = EI (GB (w)) - EI(IB) denote the corresponding vector in
domain B . We introduce the loss
LCIiP_Within = 1 ― Sim(VA,vB),
which is minimized when the two within-domain changes are Parallel.
The final loss is then a weighted sum of losses
L
Lclip .across + λclip.within Lclip_within + λref-clip Lrefclip + λref-rec Lref_rec,
(6)
(7)
with empirically determined weights of》dip_Within = 0.5, λ1∙efqip = 30, and λ1∙efj∙ec = 10. Together,
these four loss terms guide the refinement process for GB. Among these losses, Lclip_across was
proposed by StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021). The other losses are novel contributions of this
work.
Style Mixing After the training step, the generator GB generates images that are semantically
similar to the reference image IB . However, we have observed that the visual style may not be
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
sufficiently similar. We attribute this to the idea that the target domain may be a subset of the images
produced by the new generator GB. This issue was addressed in StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021)
using a second latent-mining network in order to identify a distribution of latent codes within the
domain of GB that better match the reference image. Our approach exploits the structure of latent
codes in W+ space. Latent vectors in W+ space can be divided into 18 blocks of 512 elements,
each impacting a different layer of StyleGAN2. Empirically, the latter blocks of the W+ code have
been shown to have more effect on the style (e.g. texture and color) of the image whereas the earlier
layers impact the coarse-structure or content (Zhu et al., 2021) of the image. We partition the latent
code in the image into w = (wC, wS) where wC consists of the first m blocks of the W+ latent
code that capture the content of the image, and wS consists of the remaining blocks and captures the
style. In this work, we will use m = 7 unless otherwise specified. Then we transfer the style from a
reference image using linear interpolation, to form W = (wc, WS) where
WS = (1 - α)ws + α(wref),	(8)
and WSref is last (18 - m) blocks of Wref. Consider the distribution of images generated from random
w drawn according to the distribution of latent codes from the mapping network of StyleGAN2. If
α = 0, then the distribution of images GB (W) includes the reference image, but encompasses a
wide variety of other fine visual styles. If α = 1, then the images GB (W) will still have a diverse
content, but they will all very closely follow the visual style of IB. An important application of this
method is in conditional editing of real photographs. To achieve that, first we take a real input image
Ireal and invert it in domain A using II2S on the generator GA in order to find a W+ latent code
Wreal. Then GB (WreaI) generates a corresponding image in domain B. We can then compute WreaI
by interpolating the style codes (8) so that the final image GB (WreaI) is similar to IreaI but has both
content and the visual style shifted towards domain B .
4	Results
In this section, we will show qualitative and quantitative results of our work. The only other pub-
lished method that accomplishes similar one-shot GAN domain adaptation which we are aware of
is Ojha et al. (2021). They focus on few-shot domain adaptation, but they also demonstrate a capa-
bility to solve the one-shot problem. The most closely related work to our approach is StyleGAN-
NADA (Gal et al., 2021), which is unpublished at the time of submission, however we compare to it
as the main competitor. The paper mainly discusses zero-shot domain adaptation, but the approach
can also accomplish one-shot domain adaptation, as demonstrated in their accompanying source-
code. Moreover, it demonstrates impressive improvements over the state of the art and even beats
many SOTA few-shot methods considering the visual quality. As our method can still significantly
improve upon the results shown in StyleGAN-NADA, this underlines the importance of our idea in
reducing overfitting. We compare against additional approaches in the appendix.
Training and Inference Time. Given a reference image, the training time for our method is about
15 minutes for 600 iterations on a single Titan XP GPU using ADAM as an optimizer with the same
settings as Gal et al. (2021). We use a batch size of 4. At inference time, there are different appli-
cations. In a basic operation, GAN generated images can be transferred with a single forward pass
through a GAN generator network, which works in 0.34 seconds. Considering a more advanced
operation, where existing photographs are embedded into a GAN latent space, the additional em-
bedding time has to be considered. This embedding time is only 0.22 seconds using e4e (Tov et al.,
2021) and about two minutes using II2S (Zhu et al., 2020b).
Visual Evaluation. In Fig. 5, we show a comparison of our results on faces against the two
most relevant competing methods - StyIeGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021) and few-shot-domain-
adaptation (Ojha et al., 2021). The results show that our method remains faithful to the original
identity of the embedded images in domain A, while the other two methods suffer from overfitting,
i.e., collapsing to narrow distributions which do not preserve salient features (for example the iden-
tity of a person). We show additional visual results in the supplemental materials, including results
on cars and dogs and results for fine-tuning the domain adaptation.
User Study. We also perform a user study by collecting 187 responses from Amazon Mechanical
Turk in order to compare the visual quality and the domain transfer capabilities of our framework
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 5: Comparison of our framework with state-of-the-art frameworks for StyleGAN domain
adaptation. We compare with StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021) and the few-shot method of Ojha
et al. (2021). Each row corresponds to a different reference image IB, and each column is a different
real image Ireal from domain A. Notice that our method is able to match the styles of the reference
images, while StyleGAN-NADA fails to maintain the content of the images in domain A (for ex-
ample the identity of a person is lost). On the other hand, the few-shot method suffers from severe
mode collapse.
compared to the competing methods. When asked which method generates higher quality images
from domain B, 73% of users preferred our approach to StyleGAN-NADA, and 77% selected ours
over Few-shot (Ojha et al., 2021). When asked which method is better at maintaining the similar-
ity to a corresponding source image in domain A, we found that 80% of the responses chose our
approach over StyleGAN-NADA, and 91% preferred our approach to Few-shot. Our method out-
performs the competing works in terms of the quality of the generated image, and the similarity of
the generated image to the source image from domain A. According to the user study, the other
methods produced images that are more similar to IB, but that is also an indication of overfitting
and mode collapse.
Ablation study. We perform an ablation study to evaluate each component of our framework. In
Fig. 6, we show the effect of II2S embedding, different losses and style mixing/interpolation on the
output.
Dom. A StyleGAN-Iiada +∏2S Embedding ÷^ref.clip +7Lref rec ÷-^dip.within +Style Mixing
Figure 6: Ablation study of the losses and style mixing used in our framework. From left to right: the
reference image IA and several images from domain A, the baseline approach (StyleGAN-NADA),
adding II2S instead of using the mean of domain A, adding Lrefdip, LCliP_Within, and then using style
mixing. The top row shows reconstructions of the image IA using GB .
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Image editing capabilities. Another important aspect of our method is that we are able to preserve
the semantic properties of the original StyleGAN (domain A) in domain B. We can make edits to the
images in domain B via the learned generator GB without retraining the image editing frameworks
on the new domain. Fig. 7 shows image editing capabilities in the new domain B . We use StyleFlow
edits such as lighting, pose, gender etc. to show the fine-grained edits possible in the new domain.
Figure 7: Image editing capabilities of the new domain B using StyleFlow (Abdal et al., 2021b).
This figure shows the editing results of the embedded real image Ireal transferred to domain B .
Notice that our method preserves the semantic properties of the original StyleGAN.
Limitations Our method has several limitations (See Fig. 8). Some of these limitations are inher-
ent due to the challenging nature of the problem of single-shot domain adaptation. Other limitations
can be addressed in future work. First, when we find the initial image in domain A that corresponds
to the input in domain B , we do not attempt to control for the semantic similarity. Future work
should encourage the images to have similar semantics. Second, we can only transfer between re-
lated domains. For example transferring FFHQ faces into the domain of cars is not explored in this
paper. Third, also relevant to the original distribution of the StyleGAN, embeddings into the Style-
GAN work best when the objects are transformed to the canonical positions (for example face poses
that are the same as FFHQ). Extreme poses of the objects in the reference images sometimes fail.
Figure 8: Some failure cases of our method. In these examples, we observe that the identity of the
face is compromised a bit more than in typical examples of our method.
5	Conclusions
We propose a novel method for single shot domain adaption. The main achievement of this work
is to obtain results of unprecedented quality while reducing overfitting observed in previous work.
The technical key components of our work are a method to model the domain gap as vector in CLIP
embedding space, a way to preserve within-domain variation, and several extensions for fine-grained
attribute-based control. We also introduce several new regularizers and a style mixing approach.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
References
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan: How to embed images into the
stylegan latent space? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision,pp. 4432-4441, 2019.
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan++: How to edit the embedded im-
ages? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 8296-8305, 2020.
Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, Niloy Mitra, and Peter Wonka. Labels4free: Unsupervised segmenta-
tion using stylegan, 2021a.
Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, Niloy J. Mitra, and Peter Wonka. Styleflow: Attribute-conditioned
exploration of stylegan-generated images using conditional continuous normalizing flows. ACM
Trans. Graph., 40(3), May 2021b. ISSN 0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/3447648. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3447648.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, William T. Freeman,
and Antonio Torralba. Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial net-
works, 2018.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Jonas Wulff, William Peebles, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio
Torralba. Seeing what a gan cannot generate. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4502-4511, 2019.
Adam Bielski and Paolo Favaro. Emergence of object segmentation in perturbed generative models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12663, 2019.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, George Trigeorgis, Nathan Silberman, Dilip Krishnan, and Dumitru Erhan.
Domain separation networks, 2016.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, Nathan Silberman, David Dohan, Dumitru Erhan, and Dilip Krishnan.
Unsupervised pixel-level domain adaptation with generative adversarial networks. 2017 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jul 2017. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.
2017.18. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.18.
Eric R. Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic
implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis, 2020.
Hila Chefer, Sagie Benaim, Roni Paiss, and Lior Wolf. Image-based clip-guided essence transfer.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2110.12427, 2021.
Edo Collins, Raja Bala, Bob Price, and Sabine Susstrunk. Editing in style: Uncovering the local
semantics of gans, 2020.
Andrea Frome, Greg Corrado, Jonathon Shlens, Samy Bengio, Jeffrey Dean, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato,
and Tomas Mikolov. Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model. 2013.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-
guided domain adaptation of image generators, 2021.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pp. 2414-2423, 2016.
Erik Harkonen, Aaron Hertzmann, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Sylvain Paris. Ganspace: Discovering
interpretable gan controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02546, 2020.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
Gans trained by atwo time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, pp.
6629-6640, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
ization. In ICCV, 2017.
Wonjong Jang, Gwangjin Ju, Yucheol Jung, Jiaolong Yang, Xin Tong, and Seungyong Lee. Style-
Carigan. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40(4):1-16, Aug 2021. ISSN 1557-7368. doi:
10.1145/3450626.3459860. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3450626.3459860.
justinpinkney/toonify. Toonify. https://github.com/justinpinkney/toonify.
Guoliang Kang, Lu Jiang, Yi Yang, and Alexander G. Hauptmann. Contrastive adaptation net-
work for unsupervised domain adaptation. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun 2019. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00503. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.00503.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04948, 2018.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 4401-4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training
generative adversarial networks with limited data. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020a.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyz-
ing and improving the image quality of StyleGAN. In Proc. CVPR, 2020b.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Harkonen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
Timo Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/2106.12423, 2021.
Tuomas Kynkaanniemi, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Improved
precision and recall metric for assessing generative models. CoRR, abs/1904.06991, 2019.
Kai Li, Yulun Zhang, Kunpeng Li, and Yun Fu. Adversarial feature hallucination networks for few-
shot learning. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Jun 2020. doi: 10.1109/cvpr42600.2020.01348. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
cvpr42600.2020.01348.
Ming-Yu Liu, Xun Huang, Arun Mallya, Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Jan Kautz.
Few-shot unsupervised image-to-image translation. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), Oct 2019. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2019.01065. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/ICCV.2019.01065.
Sangwoo Mo, Minsu Cho, and Jinwoo Shin. Freeze the discriminator: a simple baseline for fine-
tuning gans, 2020.
Jaemin Na, Heechul Jung, Hyung Jin Chang, and Wonjun Hwang. Fixbi: Bridging domain spaces
for unsupervised domain adaptation, 2020.
Utkarsh Ojha, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, Alexei A. Efros, Yong Jae Lee, Eli Shechtman, and Richard
Zhang. Few-shot image generation via cross-domain correspondence, 2021.
Xingang Pan, Bo Dai, Ziwei Liu, Chen Change Loy, and Ping Luo. Do 2d {gan}s know 3d
shape? unsupervised 3d shape reconstruction from 2d image {gan}s. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
FGqiDsBUKL0.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-
driven manipulation of stylegan imagery, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Elad Richardson, Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, Yotam Nitzan, Yaniv Azar, Stav Shapiro, and Daniel
Cohen-Or. Encoding in style: a stylegan encoder for image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2008.00951, 2020.
rinongal/StyleGAN NADA. Stylegan-nada. https://github.com/rinongal/
StyleGAN-nada.
Yujun Shen, Ceyuan Yang, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interfacegan: Interpreting the disentan-
gled face representation learned by gans. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 2020.
Guoxian Song, Linjie Luo, Jing Liu, Wan-Chun Ma, Chunpong Lai, Chuanxia Zheng, and Tat-Jen
Cham. Agilegan: Stylizing portraits by inversion-consistent transfer learning. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), jul 2021.
Zhentao Tan, Menglei Chai, Dongdong Chen, Jing Liao, Qi Chu, Lu Yuan, Sergey Tulyakov, and
Nenghai Yu. Michigan: Multi-input-conditioned hair image generation for portrait editing. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):1-13, 2020.
Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, Gaurav Bharaj, Florian Bernard, Hans-Peter Seidel, Patrick
Perez, Michael Zollhofer, and Christian Theobalt. Stylerig: Rigging Stylegan for 3d control over
portrait images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 6142-6151, 2020a.
Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, Mallikarjun BR, Florian Bernard, Hans-Peter Seidel, Patrick
Perez, Michael Zollhofer, and Christian Theobalt. Pie: Portrait image embedding for semantic
control. volume 39, December 2020b. doi: 10.1145/3414685.3417803.
Omer Tov, Yuval Alaluf, Yotam Nitzan, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Designing an encoder
for stylegan image manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02766, 2021.
Nontawat Tritrong, Pitchaporn Rewatbowornwong, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Repurposing gans
for one-shot semantic part segmentation, 2021.
Qian Wang and Toby Breckon. Unsupervised domain adaptation via structured prediction based
selective pseudo-labeling. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34
(04):6243-6250, Apr 2020. ISSN 2159-5399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.6091. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V34I04.6091.
Zongze Wu, Dani Lischinski, and Eli Shechtman. Stylespace analysis: Disentangled controls for
stylegan image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12799, 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric, 2018.
Ruixiang ZHANG, Tong Che, Zoubin Ghahramani, Yoshua Bengio, and Yangqiu Song. Metagan:
An adversarial approach to few-shot learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grau-
man, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2018/file/4e4e53aa080247bc31d0eb4e7aeb07a0-Paper.pdf.
Yuxuan Zhang, Huan Ling, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Jean-Francois Lafleche, Adela Barriuso, Antonio
Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Datasetgan: Efficient labeled data factory with minimal human effort,
2021.
Shengyu Zhao, Zhijian Liu, Ji Lin, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Song Han. Differentiable augmentation for
data-efficient gan training, 2020.
Jiapeng Zhu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Bolei Zhou. In-domain gan inversion for real image
editing. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 592-608. Springer, 2020a.
Peihao Zhu, Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, John Femiani, and Peter Wonka. Improved stylegan em-
bedding: Where are the good latents?, 2020b.
Peihao Zhu, Rameen Abdal, John Femiani, and Peter Wonka. Barbershop: Gan-based image com-
positing using segmentation masks, 2021.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A	Appendix: Additional Results
A. 1 Visual Evaluation of Style Transfer.
We provide additional visual evaluation of the results. In Fig. 9 and 10 we show results of domain
adaptation applied to faces. The input photographs are in the top row and the reference images are
in the first column. We can see that the results take on the style of the reference image, even though
the reference image is far outside the original GAN’s latent space. Also, we notice that overfitting is
successfully limited, as each result maintains several important aspects of the input image. In Fig. 13
and 14 we show results for cars, cats, and dogs on the same task. This shows that our method is
consistent across different StyleGAN objects/datasets.
A.2 Quantitative Comparison of Sketch Images.
We calculate the FID (Heusel et al., 2017) between 1,000 generated images and the entire sketch
dataset. Additionally, We report the precision and recall metric (Kynkaanniemi et al., 2019) to
measure the quality and diversity respectively. As shown in Tab. 1, our method outperforms the
contemporary methods FeW-Shot (Ojha et al., 2021), and StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021) on
both metrics.
Another contemporary method, TargetCLIP (Chefer et al., 2021), is capable of one-shot ‘essence
transfer’ using a latent-edit, hoWever as the Weights of the generator are not modified their approach
is restricted to the manifold of the original generator. Because it cannot shift to a completely neW
domain, TargetCLIP failed to produce any sketch images and has a precision=0. Because the images
it did generate are in the original space of StyleGAN it has high recall (0.29), but this number is not
meaningful.
Unsurprisingly, all one-shot domain transfer methods have loW recall (loW diversity) but it is signif-
icant that ours is the only approach With positive recall to Within 2 significant digits.
Table 1: Quantitative comparison on one-shot adaptation betWeen feW-shot-domain-adaptation,
StyleGAN-NADA, and our method. Evaluation metrics include FID, precision, and recall (higher
means higher diversity).
One Shot Method	F四	precision↑	recall↑
FeW-shot (Ojha et al., 2021)	158.86	0.00	0.00
SG-NADA (Gal et al., 2021)	124.55	0.12	0.00
Ours	78.35	0.33	0.02
A.3 Multi-shot Domain Adaptation.
Although it Was designed for one-shot domain adaptation, our method can be extended to feW-shot
domain adaptation by using multiple input/reference image pairs (IA, IB). In Fig. 11, We shoW the
visual improvement obtained using 3-shot reference images.
A.4 Controlling the Style Gap
Our method provides a Way to control the domain gap betWeen the domain A and domain B by
explicitly controlling the style of the images sampled from or embedded in domain A. Fig. 12 shoWs
that We can control the degree to Which style from the reference image is preserved by increasing
the style-mixing parameter α, Which is not possible With any of the competing methods. This gives
users more control over content generation and editing.
A.5 Additional Comparison
In addition to our comparison With StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al., 2021) and feW-shot domain adap-
tation (Ojha et al., 2021), We compare against three additional methods in Fig. 15. These include
one concurrently developed method called TargetCLIP (Chefer et al., 2021) as Well as tWo other
methods that Work on loWer resolution images for one-shot domain transfer. These are the method
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 9: Style transfer results obtained by our method after style interpolation in domain B . The
top row represents the real images embedded in the latent space of GA (domain A) whose latent
codes are then used by GB (domain B). The first column represents the reference images IB which
are input to our domain adaptation framework.
of Gatys et. al Gatys et al. (2016) and the the AdaIN approach (Huang & Belongie, 2017). Our
visual results compare favorably against the new methods in Fig. 15 with respect to preserving the
identity of the original image while also generating images that belong to the new domain.
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A.6 Inference and Editing Time
Our proposed approach uses II2S for training and inference and StyleFlow (Abdal et al., 2021b)
for editing in the new domain. GAN inversion using II2S on HD (1024 × 1024) images takes 150
seconds on average, and each latent-code edit operation takes 0.47 seconds. Generating the images
afterwards takes an addition 0.34 seconds. Note that the run-time is dominated by GAN -inversion
using II2S, however as we show in Fig. 16 once training is completed, we can use other GAN
inversion methods to accomplish the edits. With e4e (Tov et al., 2021) inversion is only 0.22 seconds
and the entire process of inversion, editing, and generating the edited image can be accomplished in
approximately one second.
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 10: The structure of rows and columns is the same as in Fig. 9. Note: our method also works
well when the reference images are real face images.
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
single-shot
Figure 11: Our method extends to deal with multiple reference images. The figure compares the re-
sults using 3 reference images and using single reference image. It can be observed that our method
can better catch the general style and achieve more stable results when given multiple reference
images.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022

Ref
Figure 12: Style interpolation results achieved by our framework. Unlike the competing methods,
our method has an explicit control over the styles in the domain B . Each sub figure shows a reference
image and images embedded in domain A. Notice that we can control the amount of variation in
style depending on a parameter α that can be specified by a user.
Style Direction-----*
Figure 13: Our domain transfer results on cars. The structure of rows and columns is the same as in
Fig. 9.
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 14: Our domain transfer results on cats and dogs. The structure of rows and columns is the
same as in Fig. 9.
19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 15: Additional comparisons with other baseline methods including the concurrent method
TargetCLIP (Chefer et al., 2021) as well as two lower-resolution methods from Gatys et al. (2016)
and AdaIN (Huang & Belongie, 2017). One-shot reference images from domain B are shown in the
left column. Each image is the result of transferring the image in the top row into the new domain.
Compare these images to our method in Fig. 7, our proposed approach has fewer artifacts while
preserving the identity of the image in domain A.
Figure 16: Comparison domain-transfer and editing using II2S vs e4e. The new GAN is always
trained using II2S, but once training is complete, e4e can be used to transfer images into the new
domain. II2S takes 2.5 minutes to embed the image, while e4e needs about 0.22 seconds. StyleFlow
editing takes 0.47 seconds, and StyleGAN image generation takes about 0.34 seconds.
20