Figure 1: (a): Signal loss of no freeze minus random freeze. (b): MSE of gradient estimation of nofreeze minus random freeze.
Figure 2: Gradient norm distribution of DP-SGD with or without the random freeze strategy. Thevertical dashed line indicates the clipping bound. With the random freeze strategy, in later epochsthe variance of the norm magnitude decreases. A lower number of high-magnitude gradient normsimplies less clipping bias, while the decrease in low magnitude gradient norms implies a highersignal-to-noise ratio of the perturbed gradients. The two plots overlap in the subfigure correspondingto the first epoch as the freeze rate is 0 and the networks are initialized equally. The freeze rate atthe 20th epoch is 0.45 and reaches 0.9 at the 40th epoch. Note that both axes are in log scale.
Figure 3: Histogram of the number of parameters versus the number of times a parameter is frozen.
Figure 4: Test accuracy with respect to various clipping bound and momentum pairs. The networkarchitecture is End-to-end CNN, and the privacy budget is (ε = 3, δ = 10-5). We adjust the clippingbound C and momentum μ based on their optimal values C = 0.1, μ = 0.9 (Tramer & Boneh,2021), (a) is adjusted with respect to an inversely proportional scaling rule C = τ⅛⅛ = 1, (b)1 μ 1 o.9has momentum fixed μ = 0.9 and varies the clipping bound, (c) has clipping bound fixed to C = 0.1and varies momentum. These figures demonstrate that the inversely proportional scaling rule canachieve good performance, otherwise the network performance is degraded. We also observe thatno momentum μ = 0 results in better performance, probably due to less clipping bias induced bya higher clipping bound. We find out that this rule is relatively general and independent on privacylevel. For experiment on low privacy budget (ε = 7.53, δ = 10-5), refer to Appendix F.
Figure 5: A series of Gamma distributions with the form Gamma(k, k).
Figure 6: Accuracy as a function of privacy loss. We run five experiments and computes the meanvalue. The result shows that random freeze outperforms the baseline and adjusted baseline in allhigh privacy levels.
Figure 7: Test accuracy with respect to various clipping bound and momentum pairs. The networkarChiteCture is End-to-end CNN, and the privaCy budget is (ε = 7.53, δ = 10-5). We adjust the0.9 (Tramer &C _	0.1	_1-μ = 1-0.9 =clipping bound C and momentum μ based on their optimal values C = 0.1, μ =Boneh, 2021), (a) is adjusted with respeCt to an inversely proportional sCaling rule1, (b) has momentum fixed μ = 0.9 and varies the clipping bound, (c) has clipping bound fixed toC = 0.1 and varies momentum. These figures demonstrate that the inversely proportional scalingrule can achieve good performance, otherwise the network performance is degraded. Combiningwith Figure 4, we see this rule is relatively general and does not dependent on privacy level.
