Figure 1: The overall blockdiagram of the proposed robust cross-modal semi-supervised few shotlearning (RCFSL) framework to leverage both the advantage of robust GAN as a high quality gen-erative model and a robust heterogenous semi-supervised VAE as a posterior distribution learneron multi-modality data. Robust multimodal prototypes are then calculated from the robust embed-ding using the last hidden layer in the discriminator of RCFSL, where three novel components arehighlighted in the orange bounding boxes.
Figure 2: The probabilistic graph model of theproposed RCFSL framework, where x denotes theobservations of image data and t represents theobservations of embedded feature vectors for text,y and y refer to noisy labels and corrected labelsrespectively, z and a stand for the latent variableand auxiliary variable for VAE respectively, serv-ing as a bridge to fuse two modalities. Tk and Ckrepresent the mean and the covariance for the kGaussian component of image data. λl representsthe parameter in the Poisson distribution for thelth feature. Each observation pair (xi , ti) dependson their cluster assignment and distribution pa-rameters and each cluster assignment depends onthe stick-breaking procedure Beta((K - 1)α, χ).
Figure 3: Comparison of the t-SNE visualization with two dimensional multimodal prototype spacefor the FewShot CIFAR-100 dataset using RapNetsLu et al. (2020b) and our RCFSL (β=0.2) on a10-Way 8-shot semi-supervised learning (Fig 3.(a) and (b)), where each class includes 2 noisy labelsand 2 outliers. The index number represents superclasses 0 to 9 in CIFAR-100. Each number lo-cates on the median position of the corresponding vectors and the outliers are marked with squares.
Figure 4: Comparison of the t-SNE visualization with two dimensional multimodal prototype spacefor the FewShot CIFAR-100 dataset using RCFSL with KL-divergence in variational inference andRCFSL with robust divergence (β=0.2) on a 10-Way 8-shot semi-supervised learning, where eachclass includes 2 noisy labels and 2 outliers. The index number represents superclasses 0 to 9 inCIFAR-100. Each number locates on the median position of the corresponding vectors and theoutliers are marked with squares. The embeddings from 10 distinct clusters using our method corre-sponds to true class labels, which validates the robustness of our method to label noise and outliers.
Figure 5: Exemplary images with compound noise detected by RCFSL from Clothing1M dataset,where the false labels are noted in orange and the true labels are noted in light blue.
