Figure 1: Schematic view of PDM. Normalizing flow transforms a data variable to a latent variable,and a linear diffusion (VE/VPSDE) diffuses the latent variable to a prior distribution. Data generationstarts from the prior distribution, and the generation denoises randomly generated noise to a latentvariable, and the generation eventually transforms the latent variable into the data space.
Figure 2: PDM attains a ladder structure between a data space and a latent space by the invertibility ofnormalizing flow. A score network estimates data score following blue arrows, and a model generatesimages following red arrows.
Figure 4: ScoreFlow.
Figure 5: Comparison of the linear and nonlinear diffusing mecha-nisms on a shallow network.
Figure 6: Comparison of thelinear diffusion model andPDM on a deep network.
Figure 7: Non cherry-picked samples from latent/data.
Figure 9: (a) While PT and π is different in PDM as well, the marginal distribution of μψ at t = 0depends on the transformation, hφ, modeled with normalizing flows. This ^-dependent initialrandom variable at z0 influences its fully diffused variable of ZT, and optimizing φ minimizes thediscrepancy between PT and π, where ZT 〜Pt. Theorem 2 guarantees that this discrepancy iscompletely eradicated with the optimum point of φ*. (b) Theorem 2 guarantees that for any θ, thereexists φ* such that DKL(PrkPφ*,e) = 0, which implies thatPr(x0) = Pφ*,e(x0).
Figure 8: (a) For the vanilla linear diffusion model in the data space, PT and π naturally diverges. Ifthe score network estimates the exact data score (i.e., Se(xt, t) = Vχt logPt(Xt)), then the (optimal)generative distribution becomes Pe (x0) = / PT (XT )pt0(x0∣ XT) dxτ.On the other hand, the realdistribution is Pr (x0) = J π(xτ)pτ0(x0∣xτ) dxτ, with identical (reverse) transition probability,Pt0(x0 ∣xτ) to the generative process. Mismatch of PT and π yields that the optimality of thediffusion model does not guarantee to estimate the real distribution: Pe (x0) = π(x0). (b) Since PTand π are distinctive distribution, the forward path measure μ is not included in the hypothesis classof generative path measures, {νe : the marginal distribution of Ve at t = T is π}. In addition, μ isnot the element of the closure of the hypothesis class, and we conclude that DKL (PrllPe) > 0.
Figure 10: Ablation study on tolerancelevel of the RK45 ODE solver.
Figure 11: Ablation study forthe flow temperature.
Figure 12: Non cherry-picked random samples from CIFAR-10 trained on PDM (VE, FID).
Figure 13: Non cherry-picked random samples from CelebA trained on PDM (VP, FID).
