Figure 1: (a) Visualization of the upper bound for rt. The gap between green and orange lines is the es-timate of the upper bound for ^ (b) Illustration of automated BO termination when tuning MLP on thenaval dataset from HPO-Bench (Klein & Hutter, 2019) with the BORE optimizer (Tiao et al., 2021).
Figure 2: The upper bound estimation quality is affected by the set of hyperparameters evaluationsused in the surrogate model training.
Figure 3: The mean and standard deviation of RYC and RTC scores for the compared automatictermination methods when using cross validation in the hyperparameter evaluation when tuning XGB(left) and RF (right). The mean value is shown as the large dot and the standard deviation is shown asan error bar in both dimensions.
Figure 4: The mean and standard deviation of RYC and RTC scores for considered automatictermination methods for HPO-Bench datasets. The mean value is shown in the large dot and thestandard deviation is shown as an error bar in both dimensions.
Figure 5: Fig. (a) - (c), the mean and standard deviation of RYC and RTC scores for consideredautomatic termination methods for NAS-Bench-201 datasets. Notice that validation metrics areused in these experiments, thus no positive RYC scores are observed. The mean value is shownin the big dot and the standard deviation is shown as error bar in both dimensions. In Fig. 5d, itshows a distribution of true regrets at the stopping iteration triggered by our method with consideredthresholds for HPO-Bench. The number of stopped experiments and the number of “wrong” caseswhere the true regret is larger than the threshold are shown in the legend in Fig. 5d.
Figure 6:	Fig. (a) - (d), the mean and standard deviation of RYC and RTC scores for consideredautomatic termination methods on HPO-Bench datasets using GP based BO (GP-BO), RandomSearch (RS), TPE and BORE optimizers. The mean value is shown in the big dot and the standarddeviation is shown as error bar in both dimensions.
Figure 7:	Fig. (a) - (d), the mean and standard deviation of RYC and RTC scores for consideredautomatic termination methods on NAS-Bench-201 datasets using GP based BO (GP-BO), RandomSearch (RS), TPE and BORE optimizers. The mean value is shown in the big dot and the standarddeviation is shown as error bar in both dimensions.
Figure 8:	We show validation error for training XGB (a) and RF (b) on tst-census dataset onthe x-axis and test error on the y-axis. In the low error region, the validation metrics are not wellcorrelated with the test metrics.
Figure 9: The differences between upper bound and true regret for every BO iterations when usingBORE to tune an MLP on the Naval dataset. The number of negative differences (the upper bound issmaller than the true regret) are shown in the legend next to the two options for computing βt .
