Figure 1: Typical battery discharge characteristics of 18650 cells Herle et al. (2020)In Multivariate time series scenarios variable dependencies have been investigated to improve esti-mations Yu et al. (2018). Traffic datasets are one of the prime examples wherein variation in speedand traffic density insights are useful to accurately predict vehicular traffic in other nodes of the net-work. There are numerous Graph Neural Network (GNN) based techniques which exploit the graphstructure of datasets to improve prediction accuracy Seo et al. (2016), Li et al. (2018) and Zhao et al.
Figure 2: Graph AutoEncoder Time Series (GAETS) architecture3.1	The methodThe architecture of GAETS is as depicted in 2. The objective of the method is to fore-cast Xt+T +1:t+T +τ, given the observations Xt+1:t+T, where X denotes training data and con-sists of multiple charge/discharge cycles of battery measurements. The model is denoted asXt+T +1:t+T +τ = f(A, w, Xt+1:t+T), where A is the graph structure and is parameterized by w, Tis the input window duration, our goal is to predict future data from time t + T + 1 to t + T + τ ,here τ is the output prediction window length. The graph structure represented by adjacency matrixA ∈ {0, 1}n×n is to be parameterized as it is exclusively not available to the forecasting model.
Figure 3: Battery Voltage predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)(a)	(b)Figure 4: Battery Current predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 5: Battery Energy predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)Figure 6: Evaluation metrics comparing the proposed GAETS architecture with GTS5	ConclusionBattery parameter estimation remains to be a challenging and topic of relevance due to the burgeon-ing number of Electric Vehicles in the past decade. Accurate battery capacity estimation also helpsto predict remaining usage time in battery powered consumer electronics. In this paper we introducea Graph AutoEncoder Time Series (GAETS) architecture which exploits the dependencies betweenbattery parameters (charge capacity, voltage, current etc) to provide precise estimates. We compareour architecture with the existing Graph Time Series architecture to highlight the effectiveness ofour approach.
Figure 4: Battery Current predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 5: Battery Energy predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)Figure 6: Evaluation metrics comparing the proposed GAETS architecture with GTS5	ConclusionBattery parameter estimation remains to be a challenging and topic of relevance due to the burgeon-ing number of Electric Vehicles in the past decade. Accurate battery capacity estimation also helpsto predict remaining usage time in battery powered consumer electronics. In this paper we introducea Graph AutoEncoder Time Series (GAETS) architecture which exploits the dependencies betweenbattery parameters (charge capacity, voltage, current etc) to provide precise estimates. We compareour architecture with the existing Graph Time Series architecture to highlight the effectiveness ofour approach.
Figure 5: Battery Energy predictions using GAETS (this work) and GTS Shang et al. (2021a)Figure 6: Evaluation metrics comparing the proposed GAETS architecture with GTS5	ConclusionBattery parameter estimation remains to be a challenging and topic of relevance due to the burgeon-ing number of Electric Vehicles in the past decade. Accurate battery capacity estimation also helpsto predict remaining usage time in battery powered consumer electronics. In this paper we introducea Graph AutoEncoder Time Series (GAETS) architecture which exploits the dependencies betweenbattery parameters (charge capacity, voltage, current etc) to provide precise estimates. We compareour architecture with the existing Graph Time Series architecture to highlight the effectiveness ofour approach.
Figure 6: Evaluation metrics comparing the proposed GAETS architecture with GTS5	ConclusionBattery parameter estimation remains to be a challenging and topic of relevance due to the burgeon-ing number of Electric Vehicles in the past decade. Accurate battery capacity estimation also helpsto predict remaining usage time in battery powered consumer electronics. In this paper we introducea Graph AutoEncoder Time Series (GAETS) architecture which exploits the dependencies betweenbattery parameters (charge capacity, voltage, current etc) to provide precise estimates. We compareour architecture with the existing Graph Time Series architecture to highlight the effectiveness ofour approach.
