Figure 1: Overview of the proposed model. In this example, the model predicted an image andcorresponding segmentation masks from unobserved query viewpoint vq , using three observationviews x1 -x3 . zg is a global latent variable that represents spatial relationship between objects, andZk is object-level latent variables that represent each object. Note that the Xq and segmentationshown in this figure are the actual results from our model.
Figure 2: Quantitative evaluation of novel view synthesis. Lower is better for root mean squarederror(RMSE), and higher is better for mean intersection over union (mIoU). There is no mIoU forGQN Jaco dataset because it does not provide ground truth segmentation masks.
Figure 3: Novel view synthesis results on GQN Jaco with four difference scenes. These images areprediction of unobserved query views. The number of observation views is three (N = 3).
Figure 4: Component-by-component random generation results of WeLIS and the baseline. Eachrow corresponds to a different query viewpoint. The first column shows generated images, andthe next seven columns show each slot (Xk, k ∈ {1,…，K}), while last column shows generatedsegmentation masks.
Figure 5: Random generation results from WeLIS and MulMON(baseline). The top row showsresults from WeLIS and MulMON. The bottom row shows WeLIS without Structured Prior andwithout normalizing flow for ablation study. We generated these images by randomly samplingeight zg for WeLIS, and by sampling each slot independently for MulMON. Note that the same setof zg is used in the full model(top left) and in the ablation of the Structured Prior(bottom left).
Figure 6: Random generation results from four different Zg (A-D) and four neighborhoods Zg + Jwhere is a Gaussian noise as perturbation. Each row corresponds to a different zg . The left mostcolumns of each group show the original Zg , and other columns show different perturbations J.
Figure 7: Quantitative evaluation of novel view synthesis. This figure shows scores about observa-tion views, namely, reconstruction and segmentation.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of novel view synthesis. The number of observation views N is threein this figure. The left most columns in each group show ground truth image that is not shownto the model. The second columns in each group show predicted image. The third columns showsegmentation mask.
Figure 9: Traversal of global latent spaceFigure 9 shows visualization of traversal of global latent space zg . We sample two zg and visu-alized interpolation of them. The figure shows three different examples. We can see that spatialarrangement is preserved, but individual components changes quickly.
Figure 10: Ablation study for each component: Global Encoder (PoE), GECO, separate training ofStructured PriorFigure 10 shows ablation result of Global Encoder (PoE), GECO, separate training of StructuredPrior, and Normalizing Flow. Regarding PoE, we replaced PoE with simple average, which is oftenused in many researches such as NeRF-VAE (Kosiorek et al., 2021).
Figure 11: Ground truth samples of the three datasets used in this paper: CLEVR MV, CLEVR AUGand GQN Jaco.
