Figure 1: An overview of the low-memory, two-stage Range-Net SVD for Big Data Applications. Stage 1identifies the span of the desired rank-r approximation. Stage 2 rotates this span to align with the singularvectors while extracting the singular values of the data. The input data can be streamed from either a server orsecondary memory. If the target is just a rank-r compression then Stage-2 can be discarded without any loss inaccuracy. Stage-2 only orders the rank-r features based upon their respective tail energies.
Figure 2: Network Architecture: Projection (Stage-1) and Rotation (Stage-2) for a 2-stage SVDenergy of X with respect to it’s rank-r approximation Xr = XVrVrT as, kX - BrkF ≥ kX - XrkFwhere, V = span{v1,v2, ∙∙∙ ,v『} and ViS are the right singular vectors corresponding to the largestr singular values then the minimizer of arg min ∣∣X 一 XVVT∣∣f is 匕 such that V=VT = VrVT.
Figure 3: Singular value spectrum for the three practical datasets considered in this work. One can visuallyassess that the decay rate of the singular values is non-exponential.
Figure 4: (a) True image, rank-20 reconStruction uSing (b) SktechySVD (overSampled rank k = 81) , (c)Range-Net (5-paSSeS), (d) conventional SVD. Note that Sketchy SVD reconStruction error (10-1) iS 6 orderS ofmagnitude apart from Range-Net’S reconStruction error (10-7) w.r.t. to the true Xr from conventional SVD.
Figure 5: Scree error in the extracted Singular valueS from (a) SketchySVD (≈ 1) and (b) Range-Net (≈ 10-4).
Figure 6: Cross-correlation between true (conven-tional SVD) and extracted right singular vectorsfrom (a) SketchySVD (b) Range-Net for a rank-r = 20 approximation of the Parrot image.
Figure 7: Peak memory load of Range-Net vs. SketchySVD on synthetic data.
Figure 8: Reconstruction errors (r = 20) for Range-Net and randomized SVD schemes (with and withoutpower iterations) for the non-exponentially decaying singular value spectrum over 1000 runs.
Figure 9: SketchySVD approximation errors for a synthetic dataset with linear decay in singular value spectrum,corresponding to r = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50] with corresponding oversampled rank k = [41, 81, 121, 161, 201].
Figure 10: Surface plot for the bi-quadratic tail energy (log-scale) with 2 minima, 2 saddle points, and onemaxima for X = diag(5, 1).
Figure 11: Synthetic Low Rank Case: Correlation MaP of extracted vectors 匕 over four runs. Orthonormalityis imposed for the first run resulting in a diagonal structure. Absence of this condition results in a scatter.
Figure 12: Synthetic Full Rank Case: Correlation Map of extracted vectors V over four runs. Orthonormalityloss now does not contribute and therefore all runs have a diagonal structure.
Figure 13: Variation in extracted right singular vectors (dashed green lines) for three runs with each runcomprising of 200 different train/test data splits with an 80/20 ratio. The solid red lines indicate the ground truthsingular vectors when using the entire unsplit dataset (red dots). Extracted singular vectors deviate increasinglyfrom left to right over the three runs.
Figure 15: From left to right: x-direction stream velocity at times t = 0, 100, and 200(a) SketchySVD(b) Truth(c) Range-NetFigure 16: Reshaped U indicative of dynamic modes, corresponding to top six right singular vectors for r = 5.
Figure 16: Reshaped U indicative of dynamic modes, corresponding to top six right singular vectors for r = 5.
Figure 17:	SketchySVD and Range-Net (a) extracted singular values and (b) cross correlation between estimatedand true (conventional SVD) right singular vectors for r = 5 on the Navier-Stokes data.
Figure 18:	Satellite image captures of hurricane Sandy over the Atlantic ocean at t = 0 (left) and t = 200minutes approximately (right).
Figure 19: Reshaped Ui indiCative of dynamiC modes, Corresponding to i = 1, 20, 50, 100 for r = 100(oversampled rank k = 401 for SketChySVD. The dynamiC mode approximation error stand out visually forSketChySVD for indiCes 20, 50, 100. Our method does not have suCh artifaCts.
Figure 20: SCree-error in singular values for (a) SketChySVD and (b) Range-Net where a Conventional SVD isused as the baseline in sCree-error metriC.
Figure 21:	Cross-correlation between extracted and true (conventional SVD) right singular vectors for (a)SketchySVD and (b) Range-Net for a rank r = 100 approximation. SketchySVD deviates substantially afterindex 10 (although sketching at sizes k = 401 and s = 803) while Range-Net is in good agreement for all the100 indices.
Figure 22:	Cross-correlation between extracted and true (conventional SVD) right singular vectors for (a)SketchySVD and (b) Range-Net for a rank r = 10 approximation. SketchySVD deviates substantially afterindex 3 while Range-Net is in good agreement for all the 10 indices.
Figure 23:	Scree-error in singular values for (a) SketchySVD and (b) Range-Net where a conventional SVD isused as the baseline in scree-error metric. Note that for Range-Net the error is at a scale of 10-5, 7 orders ofmagnitude apart from SketchySVD (102).
Figure 24: Reshaped Ui indicative of dynamic modes, corresponding to i = 1, 4, 7, 10 for r = 10. Thedynamic mode approximation error stand out visually for SketchySVD for indices 1, 4, 7, 10. Our method doesnot have such artifacts.
Figure 25: Cross-correlation between true (conventional SVD) and extracted left singular vectors from (a)SketchySVD (b) Range-Net for a rank-r = 20 approximation of the Parrot image.
