Figure 1: An illustration of modified SimSiam with the yellow boxes showing our proposed changesdescribed in Sec. 2.3, 2.4. In the original version the gradients of Zi = Zi∕∣∣z∕∣2 are prevented fromflowing backwards in all possible paths by the stop-grad operation. In our modified version, thanksto the added operations, We can mimic the flow of the gradients of Zi = Zi∕∣∣Zi∣∣2 that were blocked.
Figure 2: Analysis of training and evaluation of SimCLR and SimSiam on CIFAR10 for OOD withand without the proposed normalization. Every point on these plots represents the average from4 independent classes. First row, SimCLR evaluated with (a) c-Cos (b) κ from fitting a vMF (c)linear probe accuracy. Second row, SimSiam evaluated with (d) c-Cos (e) κ from fitting a vMF (f)Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) with a uniform distribution.
Figure 3: Training SimCLR on classes 0,1,2,3 from CIFAR10 and evaluating the representationduring training. (a) Using Gaussian density estimation (GDE) (Reynolds, 2009). (b) k-Cos cosinedistance to the closest (k=1) point in ID data. (c) c-Cos cosine distance to the mean direction in IDdata. Both these are defined in more detail in Section 2.5. (d) Linear evaluation (Zhang et al., 2016)of learned embedding. (d) Weighted nearest neighbor classifier (k-NN) (Wu et al., 2018). Solid linesrepresent k = 1 and dashed lines represent k = 20Figure 4: Training SimCLR on classes 0,1,2,3 from CIFAR10 and monitoring the learned vMF IDand OOD representations during training. (a) κ progress during training; solid lines are ID data anddashed are OOD data. (b) The MMD (Gretton et al., 2012) between the learned representation andsamples from uniform distribution on a unit hypersphere (lower is more uniform).
Figure 4: Training SimCLR on classes 0,1,2,3 from CIFAR10 and monitoring the learned vMF IDand OOD representations during training. (a) κ progress during training; solid lines are ID data anddashed are OOD data. (b) The MMD (Gretton et al., 2012) between the learned representation andsamples from uniform distribution on a unit hypersphere (lower is more uniform).
Figure 5: Same experiment as Figure 3 but with SimSiam.
Figure 6: Same experiment as Figure 4 but with SimSiam.
Figure 7: Same experiment as Figure 3 but after adding the normalization proposed in Section 2.3.
Figure 8: Same experiment as Figure 4 but after adding the normalization proposed in Section 2.3.
