Figure 1: Reversibility v.s. non-reversibility. In (a), a reversible index takes O(P2) time to communicate; in(b), an ideal non-reversible index moves along a periodic orbit, where the dark and light arrows denote even andodd iterations, respectively; (c) shows how a non-reversible chain conducts a round trip with the DEO scheme.
Figure 2: Illustration of DEO and DEO2. In (a), we show an ideal case of DEO; (b-d) show bad cases of DEObased on a large equi-rejection rate r ; (e) show how the generalized DEO scheme of window size 2 tacklesthe issue with a large r . The x-axis and y-axis denote (generalized) E (or O) iterations and E (or O) pairs,respectively. The dashed line denotes the failed swap attempts; the gray shaded areas are frozen to refuseswapping odd pairs at even iterations (or vice versa); the blue shaded area ensures at most one swap in a window.
Figure 3: Study of different target swap rate S via DEO?-SGD, where SGLD is the exploitation kernel.
Figure 4: Study of window sizes, learning rates, acceptance rates, and the corrections.
Figure 5: Simulations of the multi-modal distribution through different sampling algorithms.
Figure 6: DynamiCs of the index proCess. The red path denotes the round trip path for a partiCle.
Figure 7:	Study of window sizes, accuracies, learning rates, and acceptance rates on ResNet20.
Figure 8:	Dynamics of the index process of ResNet20 models in the last 200 epochs.
Figure 9: Illustration of functions g0(x) and g(x) for x ∈ (0, 1) and P = 5(b) g(x)□B.3 Discussions on the optimal Number of Chains in Big DataTo shed light on the suggestions of the optimal number of chains, we lay out two additional assump-tions:•	(B3) Integrability: U3 is integrable with respect to π(1) and π(P).
Figure 10: Analysis of standard deviation of energy estimators with respect to different learningrates through ResNet20 on CIFAR100 dataset. Note that we have transformed the average likelihoodinto the sum of likelihood with a total number of 50,000 datapoints. Hence, the learning rate is alsoreduced by 50,000 times.
Figure 11: Bias analysis based on extended windows and nosiy energy estimators.
