Figure 1: An example of an interpretable, universal, and physically realizable feature-fool attackagainst a ResNet50. The patch depicts a crane, however, when printed, physically inserted into ascene with sunglasses, and photographed, it causes a misclassification as a pufferfish. The patchwas created by perturbing the latent of a generator to manipulate the image in a feature-space andtraining with a loss that jointly optimizes for fooling the classifier and resembling some non-targetdisguise class.
Figure 2:	Adversarial features in nature. (a) A peacock and butterfly with adversarial eyespots(unfortunately, peacock and ringlet butterfly are ImageNet classes, so one cannot meaningfully testhow ImageNet networks might be misled by them). (b) A mimic octopus from Norman et al. (2001)is classified as a sea snake by a ResNet50.
Figure 3:	Our fully differentiable pipeline for creating patch, region, and generalized patch attacks.
Figure 4: Examples of universal patch (top), region (middle), and generalized patch (bottom)feature-fool attacks. Each patch and generalized patch is labeled with its mean fooling confidenceunder insertion for random locations and source images (labeled ‘Adv’) and the confidence withwhich it is classified as the disguise class (labeled ‘Img’). Numbers in each patch and generalizedpatch subfigure title come from different inputs, so they can add to be > 1. The region attacks arelabeled with their confidence as their source class (‘Src’) and the target class (‘Tgt’).
Figure 5: Feature-fool patch attacks produce moredeceptive and interpretable targeted universal at-tacks than ablation tests. Fooling conf. gives tar-get class confidence. Interpretability conf. showsthe auxiliary network’s label class confidence forthe patch. Attacks further up and right are better.
Figure 6: Successful examples of universal, physically-realizable feature-fool attacks (top) andpixel-space attacks (bottom). See Appendix A.6 for full-sized versions of the patches.
Figure 7: Patch, region, and generalized patch adversaries being used to guide three class-universalcopy/paste adversarial attacks. Patch adversary example pairs are on the left, region adversaries inthe middle, and generalized patch adversaries on the right of each odd row. Six successful attackexamples are on each even row.
