Figure 1: The illustration of Ebbinghaus forgetting curve.
Figure 2: The illustration of the proposed stepped sampler. The upper half of the figure is the LSTMnetwork, the lower half describes the workflow of the stepped sampler. The step size m is the sizeof the sub-batch, which is set to 3 in the figure, the step stride n is set to 1, the batch size L is set to5 for the illustration. We operated the stepped sampling of the input data within each batch. The carimages are from Youtube-Objects dataset (Brox & Malik, 2010).
Figure 3: The video detection results of UCF101, which uses the proposed stepped sampler.
Figure 4: The training loss and test accuracy of the traditional sampler LSTM model and the steppedsampler LSTM model. The blue curves denote the training loss, and the yellow curves denote thetest accuracy. The above six models are all with batch size 25. Subfigure (a) is a traditional LSTMmodel, which uses the batch sampler in PyTorch. Subfigure (b) is with the proposed stepped sampler,whose batch size is 25, step size is 20, step stride is 1. Subfigure (c), (d), (e), (f) are with the steppedsampler, whose batch size is 25, step size is 20, step stride is 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively. Our purpose isto study the better step stride when the batch size and step size are fixed.
Figure 5: The training loss and the test accuracy of the traditional sampler and the stepped samplermodel. The batch size of the three models are all 20. The blue curve denotes the training loss,and the yellow curve denotes the test accuracy. (a) is LSTM with the traditional batch sampler ofPyTorch. (b) and (c) are LSTM with the proposed stepped sampler, using the stepped size 10, andthe step stride of (b) is set to 2, and the step stride of (c) is set to 5. The training loss of (c) convergesfaster than (a), and the test accuracy of (c) is more stable than (a), when the test accuracy of the bothseems to be equal value.
Figure 6: The training loss and the test accuracy of the traditional model and our stepped samplermodel. The batch size of the three models are all 15. The blue curve denotes the training loss, andthe yellow curve denotes the test accuracy. (a) is LSTM with the traditional sampler, batch samplerin PyTorch. (b) and (c) are LSTM with the proposed stepped sampler, with the same stepped size10, when the step strides of (b) and (c) are set to 3 and 5 respectively. The training loss of (c) stillconverges faster than (a).
