Figure 1: The architecture of NeuroSed.
Figure 2: Heat Map of Sed error against querysize in Dblp. Darker means higher error.
Figure 3: F1-score in range queries on Sed (a-e) and Ged (f-h). The range threshold is set asa percentage of the max distance observed in the test set.
Figure 4: Ablation study to analyze the impact of siamese architecture and function F.
Figure 5: (a) A sample set of graphs and their corresponding Ged and Sed matrices. (b)Example of a graph mapping. The dashed nodes and edges represent dummy nodes and edges.
Figure 6: Mean Relative Error in Generated Data. Here Range = UB - LB, and SED = (LB + UB)/2.
Figure 7: PreCision@k on k-NN queries.
Figure 8: Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for Dblp. Darker meanshigher error.
Figure 9: Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for Amazon. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 10:	Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for PubMed. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 11:	Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for CiteSeer. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 12:	Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for Cora_ML. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 13:	Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for Protein. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 14:	Heat Maps of Sed error against query size and Sed values for AIDS. Darker meanshigher error.
Figure 15:	Heat Maps of Ged error against query size and Ged values for AIDS’. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 16:	Heat Maps of Ged error against query size and Ged values for Linux. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 17:	Heat Maps of Ged error against query size and Ged values for IMDB. Darkermeans higher error.
Figure 18:	Visualizations of query and resulting matches produced by NeuroSed. Red, Greenand Yellow colors indicate Carbon, Nitrogen and Oxygen atoms respectively. The actual andpredicted Sed for the target graphs are (b) 0, 0.4, (c) 0, 0.5, (d) 1, 0.6, (e) 0, 0.6 and (f) 1, 0.6.
