Figure 1: An example from the AdjacentToRed task and its formulation as a logical reasoning problem.
Figure 2: Left (A): The Planner-Reasoner Architecture with an example solution. Right (B): The overall(end-to-end) training process of the model by deep reinforcement learning. “Perm” denotes Permute operator.
Figure 3: The architecture of the Base Planner and its enhanced version. Left: The Base Planner is based on aone-layer fully-activated Reasoner followed by max-pooling operations to predict an indicator of whether an opshould be activated. Right: The Enhanced Planner uses MCTS to further boost the performance.
Figure 4: The reasoning costs (in FLOPs) of different models at the inference stage (1 M=1×105 6 * *, 1 G=1×109).
Figure 5: The reasoning paths of PRIMA. The gray arrows denote the “shared path”. The colored arrows insub-figures (A) and (B) denote task-specific paths and instance-specific paths, respectively. In (A), besides theAdjacentToRed task we have introduced earlier, we also consider the 1-Outdegree task, which reasonsabout whether the out-degree of a node is exactly equal to 1, and the 4-Connectivity task, which is todecide whether there are two nodes connected within 4 hops.
Figure 6: The reasoning costs (in FLOPs) of PRIMA and three variants of PRISA at the inference stage (1M=1×106, 1 G=1×109).
Figure 7: The quantitative evaluation of ops reuse between different Tasks in PRIMA.
Figure 1:	An example from the AdjacentToRed task and its formulation as a logical reasoning problem.
Figure 2:	Left (A): The Planner-Reasoner Architecture with an example solution. Right (B): The overall(end-to-end) training process of the model by deep reinforcement learning. “Perm” denotes Permute operator.
Figure 3: The architecture of the Base Planner and its enhanced version. Left: The Base Planner is based on aone-layer fully-activated Reasoner followed by max-pooling operations to predict an indicator of whether an opshould be activated. Right: The Enhanced Planner uses MCTS to further boost the performance.
Figure 4: The reasoning costs (in FLOPs) of different models at the inference stage (1 M=1×106, 1 G=1×109).
Figure 5: The reasoning paths of PRIMA. The gray arrows denote the “shared path”. The colored arrows insub-figures (A) and (B) denote task-specific paths and instance-specific paths, respectively. In (A), besides theAdjacentToRed task we have introduced earlier, we also consider the 1-Outdegree task, which reasonsabout whether the out-degree of a node is exactly equal to 1, and the 4-Connectivity task, which is todecide whether there are two nodes connected within 4 hops.
