Figure 1: RBC model with consumers, firms, and governments. Arrows represent money flow.
Figure 2: Structured learning curricula. Colored bars show how annealing activates over time.
Figure 3: Structured Curricula and Training, Open Economy, 3 runs. In each plot, the blue(black) vertical line shows when the firms (government) start training, see Figure 2. Left two plots:Consumer and firm rewards during training. All runs converged to an approximate equilibrium, asconfirmed by a best-response analysis. The outcomes were chosen to be qualitatively similar acrossruns. Once firms start training, their reward significantly increases. When the government startstraining, firms get even higher reward, as the social welfare definition includes the firm’s objective(profits). Right two plots: Average wages and prices (over firms) during training. Firms increaseprices rapidly and lower wages once they start training.
Figure 4: In each plot, the agent types (consumer, firm, and government, resp.) refer to caseswhen only that agent type is training. Left: Best-Responses during Training. The stacked barchart shows the improvement in the mean rewards of an agent type. For firms and governments, themean rewards are measured in units of 104 and 103, respectively. We compare the best responseimprovement in the middle and at the end of training. The improvement from best response issignificant in the middle and much less at the end, indicating that training is closer to an equilibriumat the end. Middle: Outcomes under Best-Response. After training, typically neither consumernor firm rewards change significantly under a best-response analysis. This holds generally for theapproximate equilibria reported in this work. Here, rewards are on an absolute scale. In the figure, wedisplay only those which change by more than 1%. Right: Comparing Fixed and RL GovernmentPolicies. Mean rewards for all agent types under fixed tax rates. Again, for firms and governments,the mean rewards are measured in units of 104 and 103, respectively. The mean rewards for theconsumers increase with tax rates, whereas for the firms they decrease. An RL government canimprove the mean reward for both types by appropriately adapting tax rates. RL policies increase thesocial welfare by almost 15% over the best baseline policy with a fixed tax rate.
Figure 5:	Learned Equilbria in Open (Bottom) and Closed (Top) RBC Models. Outcomes atconvergence for the same experiments in Figure 4. Each point represents an approximate equilibrium,verified by an approximate best-response analysis. Points of the same color and shape correspond tothe same run. Top: In the closed economy, training often converges to equilibria with low consumerreward and little production. In particular, social welfare (government reward) does not increase withhigher tax rates, average labor does not change with wages, and consumption is unchanged withprice. An exception is an equilibrium with significantly higher social welfare, labor, and consumption.
Figure 6:	Open Economy Rollouts, Two Different Equilibria. We show actions and states fortwo representative runs at two qualitatively different equilibria. Heatmaps for the same metric usethe same range of intensities, e.g., for prices in the top and bottom row. We observe that firms havedifferent strategies: some set prices high and rely on exporting goods (for example, firm 3); othersset prices lower and also sell to consumers (for example, firm 0). Consumers respond sensibly, onlyconsuming when prices are low and only working when wages are not 0. The differences in initialfirm endowments as well as evolution during the episode lead to different final capital levels.
