Figure 1: Flux and state kernels in FINN for the one-dimensional case (left); detailed assignment ofthe individual modules with their contribution to Eq. 1 (right). Read lines indicate gradient flow.
Figure 2: Plots of Burger’s data (red) and in-dis-test (blue) prediction using different models. Theplots in the first row show the solution over x and t (the red lines mark the transition from train toin-dis-test), the second row visualizes the best model’s solution distributed in x at t = 2.
Figure 3: Plots of Burger’s data (red) and prediction (blue) of out-dis-test data using different mod-els. The plots in the first row show the solution over x and t, the second row visualizes the bestmodel’s solution over x at t = 1.
Figure 4: Plots of diffusion-sorption's dissolved concentration (red) and in-dis-test prediction (blue)using different models. The first row shows the solution over x and t (red lines mark the transitionfrom train to in-dis-test), the second row visualizes the solution distributed in x at t = 10 000.
Figure 5: Plots of diffusion-sorption’s dissolved concentration data (red) and prediction (blue) ofout-dis-test data using different models. The plots in the first row show the solution over x and t,the second row visualizes the solution distributed in x at t = 10 000.
Figure 6: Plots of diffusion-reaction’s activator data u1 (red) and extrapolated prediction (blue) usingdifferent models. The plots in the first row show the solution distributed over x and y at t = 50, andthe plots in the second row show the solution distributed in x at y = 0 and t = 50.
Figure 7: Plots of diffusion-reaction’s activator data (red) and prediction (blue) of unseen datasetusing different models. The plots in the first row show the solution distributed over x and y att = 10, and the plots in the second row show the solution distributed in x at y = 0 and t = 10.
Figure 8: Plots of the learned functions (blue) as a function of u compared to the data (red) forBurger’s (left) and diffusion-sorption (second from left). The learned activator u1 and inhibitor u2reaction functions (right plots of the pairs in center and right) in the diffusion-reaction equation arecontrasted to the corresponding ground truth (left plots of the pairs).
Figure 9: Breakthrough curve prediction of FINN (blue line) during training using data from coresample #2 (left), during testing using data from core sample #1 (second from left) and total concen-tration profile prediction using data from core sample #2B (second from right). The predictions arecompared with the experimental data (red circles) and the results obtained using the physical model(orange dashed line). The learned retardation factor R(u) is shown in the right-most plot.
Figure 10: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theBurger’s equation at t = 2 for the in-dis-test dataset.
Figure 11: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theBurger’s equation at t = 1 for the out-dis-test data.
Figure 12: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of thedissolved concentration in the diffusion-sorption equation at t = 10 000 for the in-dis-test dataset.
Figure 13: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of thedissolved concentration in the diffusion-sorption equation at t = 10 000 for the out-dis-test dataset.
Figure 14: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theactivator in the diffusion-reaction equation at t = 50 for the in-dis-test dataset.
Figure 15: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theactivator in the diffusion-reaction equation at t = 10 for the out-dis-test dataset.
Figure 16: Plots of Allen-Cahn’s data and prediction of in-dis-test data using different models. Theplots in the first row show the solution over x and t (the red lines mark the transition from train toin-dis-test), the second row visualizes the best model’s solution distributed in x at t = 1.
Figure 17: Plots of Allen-Cahn’s data and prediction of out-dis-test data using different models.
Figure 18: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theAllen-Cahn equation at t = 1 for the in-dis-test dataset.
Figure 19: Prediction mean over ten different trained models (with 95% confidence interval) of theAllen-Cahn equation at t = 1 for the out-dis-test data. The right-most plot shows the accuratelylearned reaction function from the data samples.
Figure 20: Prediction pairs for train and in-dis-test (left and right figure columns of the pairs) of theBurger’s (left top, polynomial order 5), diffusion-sorption (top right, polynomial order 3), diffusion-reaction (bottom left, polynomial order 5 since higher orders did not converge), and Allen-Cahn(bottom right, polynomial order 10) equations using polynomial regression.
Figure 21: Plots of the train prediction in the Burger’s (left), diffusion-reaction (center), and Allen-Cahn equations (right) using FINN with polynomial fitting. Due to instability issues, the diffusion-sorption equation could not be solved with the polynomial FINN. The plots in the first row show thesolution over x and t, and the plots in the second row show the solution distributed in x.
Figure 22: Paired plots of the in-dis-test and out-dis-test prediction (left and right of the pairs,respectively) in the Burger’s (top left), diffusion-sorption (top right), diffusion-reaction (bottom left),and Allen-Cahn (bottom right) equations obtained by training FINN with noisy data. The plots inthe first row of the pairs show the solution over x and t (red line marks the transition from train toin-dis-test), and the plots in the second row of the pairs show the best model’s solution distributedin x.
Figure 23: Prediction mean over ten different trained FINN (with 95% confidence interval) of theBurger’s (top left), diffusion-sorption (top right), diffusion-reaction (bottom left), and Allen-Cahn(bottom right) equations obtained by training FINN with noisy data for the in-dis-test and out-dis-test (top and bottom, accordingly) prediction.
Figure 24: Both left: plots of the diffusion-reaction equation’s activator u using PINN trained withfiner resolution dataset. Both right: plots of the diffusion-reaction equation’s activator u usingPhyDNet with the original network size.
Figure 25: Prediction mean (with 95% confidence interval) of the activator (top) and inhibitor (bot-tom) in the diffusion-reaction equation at t = 50 compared with the in-dis-test data.
Figure 26: Runtime comparison of Neural ODE with a single hidden layer consisting of 50 hiddennodes run on CPU and GPU for 1 000 time steps. The benefit of using GPU starts to be seen whenlarger batch sizes (> 20 000) are used.
