Figure 1: An overview of G-Mixup. The task is binary graph classification. We have two classes ofgraphs G and H with different topologies (G has two communities while H has eight communities).
Figure 2: Estimated graphons on IMDB-BINARY, REDDIT-BINARY, and IMDB-MULTI. ObVi-ously, graphons of different classes of graphs are quiet different. This observation validates thedivergence of graphons between different classes of graphs, which is the basis of the G-Mixup. Thegraphons are estimated by LG. More estimated graphons via various methods are in Appendix B.3.
Figure 3: The visualization of generated synthetic graphs on dataset REDDIT-BINARY. The firstrow is the original graphs in the dataset while the second row is the generated graphs through theproposed G-Mixup. The graphs in (a) and (b) are the original graphs of class 0 and class 1. Thedistinct difference of these two classes of graphs is that graphs of class 0 have one high-degree nodewhile graphs of class 1 have two ( marked with → in (a) and (b)). (c)∕(d) shows graphs generatedwith the mixed graphon (1 * W0 + 0 * Wι) / (0 * W0 + 1 * Wi), which have one/two high-degreenode/nodes (marked with — in (c) and (d)) because the mixed graphon only contains W0/W1. Thesynthetic graphs generated from (0.5 * W0 + 0.5 * W1) is the mixture of graphs of class 0 andclass 1, which appears as a high-degree node and a dense subgraph (marked with -→ and in (e),respectively). The visualization shows that synthetic graphs are the mixture of the original graphs.
Figure 4: The training/validation/test curves on IMDB-BINARY, IMDB-MULTI, REDDIT-BINARY and REDDIT-MULTI-5K with GCN as backbone. The curves are depicted on ten runs.
Figure 5: The estimated graphon on various dataset with different graphon estimation methods.
Figure 6: The impact of the node numbers of generated synthetic graphs on IMDB-BINARY andREDDIT-BINARY datasets. The red vertical line indicates the average number of all the originalgraphs. The blue line represents that classification accuracy with different number of nodes ofgenerated graphs. Obviously, the accuracy reach the maximum values around the red line on bothtwo datasetsFigure 7: The performance of G-mixup using GCNs with different depth on IMDB-BINARY andREDDIT-BINARY. This figure show that G-Mixup consistently improve GCN when it goes deeper.
Figure 7: The performance of G-mixup using GCNs with different depth on IMDB-BINARY andREDDIT-BINARY. This figure show that G-Mixup consistently improve GCN when it goes deeper.
