Figure 1: (Left) Even through independent observations, infants can build a mental model of thearticulated object for part parsing based on its kinematics. (Middle) Likewise, we propose an unsu-pervised generative method that learns to parse the single-frame, unstructured 3D data of articulatedobjects and predict the part-wise implicit fields as well as their part poses as joint parameters. (Right)Our approach outperforms the previous works in consistent part parsing for articulated objects.
Figure 2: Model overview. To infer implicit field O based on part poses {Bi}N=1 and part-wiseimplicit fields {Oi }N=1, the category-common decoders Fp,c and {Ff,c }N=1 capture pose biases andshape priors, the instance-dependent decoders Fp,z and {Fis,z}iN=1 infer target specific components.
Figure 4: Visualization of the part segmentation. Mesh re-construction is shown inside a box. Best viewed in zoom.
Figure 5: Visualization of parts andprimitives. The boxes represent theparts or primitives used to reconstructthe semantic parts.
Figure 6: Interpolation in terms of shapeand joint state.
Figure 7: Real depth map input. (Left) RBOdataset (Martin-Martin et al., 2θ18) and (Right)Articulated Object Dataset (Michel et al., 2015).
Figure 8: The architectures of our networks.
Figure 9: Visualization of the canonically Posedand randomly Posed ground-truth meshes of eachcategory. The colors corresPond to the differentground-truth Part labels.
Figure 10: Visualization of the additional part segmentation results of the proposed approach withvarious samples. For drawer category, the different between some GT shapes are subtle (e.g., differ-ence in handle shapes), we pick the three samples with distinct shape difference to avoid confusion.
Figure 11: Visualization of the part segmentation results given input shapes with various part poses.
Figure 12: Visualization of the train-ing process. The first two rows showthe reconstruction results for targetshapes having the same part shapesbut different part poses. The bot-tom row shows the number of train-ing steps.
Figure 13: Illustration of Lloc in 2D.
Figure 14: Joint parameter estimation performance.
Figure 15: Plot of F-score on averagewith various thresholds.
