Figure 1: (a) Procedure: Start by sampling a set of hypothetical graphs G given the current graphbeliefs γ, and apply an intervention on targets Ik on the functional parameters P which results inpartially altered parameters Pk . Continue by sampling sets of hypothetical interventional experi-ments under Pk for every graph in G and compute the corresponding discrepancy score Dk as aratio of variance-between-graphs VBGk and variance-within-graphs VWGk. (b) Landscape of thediscrepancy score in terms of VBGk and VWGk , in logarithmic scale.
Figure 2: Two-Stage DAG Sampling: Based on a soft-adjacency σ(γ), we sample a topologicalnode ordering from an iterative refined score which is repeatedly computed until we have processedall nodes of the graph. We proceed by permuting σ(γ) according to the drawn node ordering andconstrain the upper triangular part to ensure DAGness. Finally, we take independent Bernoulli drawsof the unconstrained edge beliefs and arrive at a sampled DAG.
Figure 3: Adapted workflow of DSDIwith Active Intervention TargetingDSDI’s architectural choices allow a seamless integration of our proposed active intervention tar-geting into stage 2 of DSDI, where graphs are evaluated using interventional data. See Figure 3for an illustrative description of the adapted workflow and §2 for a compact description of the baseframework.
Figure 4: DSDI with active intervention targeting (orange) leads to superior performance over ran-dom intervention targeting (blue) on random graphs of size 15. The performance gap becomes moresignificant with increasing edges density. The plot shows average performance in terms of SHD.
Figure 5: AIT-guided DCDI (orange) allows a more rapid discovery of the causal structure comparedto DSDI relying on random interventions (blue). The distribution of selected intervention targetsshows its correlated connection to the topology of the underlying graph where nodes of greaterimpact on the overall system are preferentially studied and nodes without children are rarely chosen.
Figure 6: DSDI: Dynamics and target distribution of AIT for a structured jungle graph of size 15.
Figure 7: Correlation scores between the number of individual target selections and different topo-logical properties of those targets. AIT shows strong correlations with the measured properties overall graphs, which indicates a controlled discovery of the underlying structure through preferentialtargeting of nodes with greater (downstream) impact on the overall system.
Figure 8: Convergence Behaviour in terms of SHD for random ER-4 graphs over 10 variables underdifferent noise levels η, where Active Intervention Targeting (orange) clearly outperforms RandomTargeting (blue) over all noise levels. The performance gap becomes of larger magnitude as thenoise level increases. Error bands were estimated using 3 random ER graphs per setting.
Figure 9: Visualization of Structured Graphs as proposed in Ke et al. (2019) - adapted illustration17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022A.3.2 Real-World DatasetsBesides the many synthetic graphs, we evaluate our method on real-world datasets provided by theBnLearn data repository. Namely on the Asia (Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988) and the Sachs(Sachs et al., 2005) datasets (see Fig. 10 for a visualization of their underlying ground-truth struc-ture). Sachs (Sachs et al., 2005) represents a systems biology dataset which exhibits non-linearity,confounding and complex structure.
Figure 10: Ground-truth structureLearn data repository - Illustration from: https://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/discrete-small.html(b) Sachsof the evaluated real-world datasets provided by the Bn-A.4 Availability of Used (Existing) AssetsBase Frameworks.
Figure 11: DSDI with AIT (orange) leads to superior performance over random intervention tar-geting (blue) on random graphs of size 10 of varying edge densities. Error bands were estimatedusing 10 random ER graphs per setting.
Figure 12: DSDI with AIT (orange) leads to superior performance over random intervention tar-geting (blue) on random graphs of size 15 of varying edge densities. Error bands were estimatedusing 10 random ER graphs per setting.
Figure 13: Correlation scores over graphs of varying size and density between the number of in-dividual target selections and different topological properties of those targets. AIT shows strongcorrelations with the measured properties over all graphs, which indicates a controlled discovery ofthe underlying structure through preferential targeting of nodes with greater (downstream) impacton the overall system.
Figure 14: Visualization of target selection on structured graphs of size 5 - bigger node size denotesmore selection of the node. While Random Targeting acts as we expect and selects every node anuniform amount, AIT prefers targeting of nodes with greater (downstream) impact on the overallsystem, i.e. nodes of higher topological order.
Figure 15: Edge Dynamics of the examined structured graphs spanning over 15 variables - Part1: The upper part shows the dynamics of random targeting and the lower of active interventiontargeting.
Figure 16: Edge Dynamics of the examined structured graphs spanning over 15 variables - Part2: The upper part shows the dynamics of random targeting and the lower of active interventiontargeting.
Figure 17: Convergence behaviour in terms of SHD for random ER graphs of various densities over10 variables under different noise levels η . Overall, Active Intervention Targeting (orange) clearlyoutperforms Random Targeting (blue) over all densities under all noise levels. The performance gapbecomes of larger magnitude as density of the graph and the noise level increases. Error bands wereestimated using 3 random ER graphs per setting.
Figure 18: AIT chooses informative intervention targets by preferentially identifying and targetingthe pair of nodes corresponding to the undirected edge (nodes are marked red in the distribution ofselected target nodes and edges is visualized red in the graph on the right). - First set of experimentsbased on the structured graphs chain5 and tree5.
Figure 19: AIT chooses informative intervention targets by preferentially identifying and targetingthe pair of nodes corresponding to the undirected edge (nodes are marked red in the distributionof selected target nodes and edges is visualized red in the graph on the right). - Second set ofexperiments based on the structured graph full5.
Figure 20: Limited intervention targets on Chain5: The impact of the restricted target node (redcircled node) is clearly observable in the convergence speed (left) and distribution of target selections(middle). The speed of convergence indicates a dependence on the topological characteristic of therestricted intervention target.
Figure 21: Limited intervention targets on Tree5: The impact of the restricted target nodes (red cir-cled nodes) is clearly observable in the convergence speed (left) and distribution of target selections(middle).
Figure 22: While DCDI Vanilla assumes access to the full interventional target space through thecomplete optimization, the AIT guided DCDI approach reevaluates its interventional target space ofsize K = 6 every L = 1000 gradient steps. Among the above evaluated graphs (ground-truth on theleft), DCDI+AIT demonstrates a more rapid identification of the underlying causal structure whileachieving same or better performance in terms of SHD. The distribution of selected single-nodeintervention targets reveals again its connection to the topological properties of the correspondingnodes.
Figure 23: All evaluated target space sizes K ∈ {2, 4, 6, 8} show that DCDI+AIT (orange) out-performs DCDI (blue) in terms of sample complexity while achieving same or better performance.
