Figure 1: Different operational sequences when jointly performing low-rank decomposition and pruning. HereL and S represent low-rank decomposition and sparsification, respectively.
Figure 2: The approximation error when compress-ing the weight tensor of one layer in ResNet-20 usingdifferent operational sequences (L+S, S(L) and L(S)).
Figure 3: Exploring low-rankness of convolutional layer via matrix decomposition (Top) and tensor decompo-sition (Bottom). Here tensor train (TT) decomposition is adopted for illustration.
Figure 4: Output feature maps of one layer of ReSNet-20 after non-compression (Left), tensor decomposition(Middle) and matrix decomposition (Right). The visualization shown here is based on the information of onechannel. It is seen that high-order tensor decomposition makes the feature map of the compressed layermore similar to that of the original uncompressed layer. More detailed results are reported in Appendix B.2.
Figure 5: Loss curves of a ResNet-20 trained on CIFAR-10 dataset using our RASPA algorithm. Here the curvesof the individual low-rank and sparse loss components are also illustrated. It is seen that the low-ranknessand sparsity are indeed imposed on the model via using RASPA.
Figure 6: The effect of optimization procedure for jointly TT decomposing and pruning ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10. Here RASPA and the direct method use the same TT-rank setting and sparsity ratio. However, the directmethod does not perform optimization on original model. Instead, it first performs TT decomposition and thenprunes the difference between original model and the low-rank component to obtain the sparse component. Thetwo components generated by this direct method will then be fine-tuned with the same way that RASPA uses.
Figure 7: Visualization of one layer of ResNet-20 before and after performing our proposed RASPA compres-sion. Here the low-rank and sparse components of the compressed layer are also visualized. It is seen thatlow-rank component preserve most of weight information, and some spatial patterns are contained inthe sparse component.
