Figure 1: Framework of Multi-Domain Self-Supervised Learning: Let us consider our input as amixture of domains, containing datasets from various sources. We introduce MDSSL, a three-levelhierarchical self-supervised learning approach to perform representation learning on all of thesedomains at the same time. Using a standard ResNet-50 encoder, we learn latent representationsthat are optimized using the MDSSL objective. We support MDSSL under two setups - with andwithout domain labels. When domain labels are not available, we first cluster representations toidentify pseudo-domain-labels and then train MDSSL. We use a robust clustering approach, whilerecomputing clusters at regular intervals.
Figure 2: Effect of number oftraining datasets. In this plot, Weshow that when the number of train-ing datasets increases in MDSSL,the top-1 accuracy increases andeventually beats the SimCLR single-domain baseline, marked by dottedlines. We train MDSSL on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10, SVHN,Tiny-ImageNet and DTD.
Figure 3: Top-1 accuracy of MDSSL trained on CIFAR-10 and SVHN with varying λ1 (similar-ity within dataset) and λ2 (similarity across datasets). In the first plot, we observe that increasingλ1 from -1 (SimCLR Chen et al. (2020)) quickly drops the top-1 accuracy since samples within adataset become more and more indistinguishable. In the second plot, when λ1 = -0.9, the top-1accuracy steadily improves with λ2 until a threshold (λ2 = 0.2) and then drops. These plots showthat there is a sweet-spot in selecting λ1 and λ2 such that we achieve high top-1 accuracy.
Figure 4: Latent Space of MDSSL with Clustering: We use TSNE to visualize the latent space ofMDSSL with clustering on CIFAR-10 and SVHN. We observe that clustering helps us distinguishbetween domains and this improves when we apply robust clustering as shown above.
Figure 5: MDSSL trained with Clustering: We train MDSSL using clustering and robust cluster-ing on CIFAR-10 and SVHN (left) and CIFAR-10 and STL-10 (right). We observe that, althoughdomain labels are not used in clustering, We are able to improve the performance of MDSSL com-pared to SimCLR.
