Figure 1: Concept: Two-stage stochastic subsampling process. (a) In the first stage, we screen out lessimportant data points to construct the candidate subset. (b) In the second stage, we autoregressively selectinstances from the candidate subset.
Figure 2: Overview. Two-stages of Stochastic Subsampling. (a) Construction of candidate subset Dc withsampling mask for each instance from Bernoulli distribution. (b) Iteratively sampling elements from thecandidate set with multinomial distribution to construct the subset Ds.
Figure 3: Target Tasks: (a) Feature selection for reconstruction. (b) Feature selection for prediction.
Figure 4: (a) MNIST Classification. (b) 1D Function Reconstruction. (c) Image Reconstruction on CelebA. (d)Attribute classification with feature selection on CelebA.
Figure 5: (a) Full-image, (b) Random, (c)DPS, (d) INVASE, (e) SSS. All models select15 pixels of the original image.
Figure 6: Visualization of 1D function reconstruction with Random, LTS, and SSS.
Figure 7: Graphical Models: (a) Feature seleCtion for reConstruCtion. (b) Feature SeleCtion for prediCtiontask. (c) InstanCe seleCtion for representative data points. (d) InstanCe seleCtion for few-shot ClassifiCation.
Figure 8: Visualization of 1D function reconstruction with three different subset selection models. Each methodselects 15 out of 400 elements. As can be seen, SSS selects elements that result in better reconstructed functions.
Figure 9: Visualization of reconstructed images for the CelebA dataset. Each model selects 40, 60, 80, and 100pixels from a 218 × 178 image and reconstruct the full image using only the selected pixels.
Figure 10: Zoom-In for best view. Selected pixels for different tasks on CelebA. As can be seen from theselected pixels, SSS adaptively selects different pixels for both reconstruction and classification. Pixels forreconstruction are more spread out to include the background since this contributes to the reconstruction loss.
Figure 11: Visualization of a set with 200 images for instance selection. The two stage selection method in SSSis visualized as Candidate Set and coreset. A subset of size 5 is visualized.
Figure 12: Sample visualization of prototype selection for the miniImagenet dataset on the few-shot classifica-tion task. Each row represents a set that corresponds to the support from which a prototype is selected for thefew-shot classification task.
Figure 14: Accuracy with varying sizeof subset and the number of particlesfor MCMC.
Figure 15: Ablation: Visualization of 1D function reconstruction. In the ablation studies, we compare the firststage (CAND) and the second stage (AUTO) with SSS. Additionally, we replace the Candidate Selection stage(Stage 1) in SSS with random selection (RANAUTO) and compare the performance of these models. As canbe seen from the visualized reconstructed outputs, the combination of the Candidate Seletion stage with theAutoregressive stage results in the best subset selection for the reconstruction task.
Figure 16: (a) CIFAR10 Reconstruction. (b) CIFAR10 Classification.
