Figure 1: The EU power network under the adaptive degree-based attack which removes the mostcritical node recursively with (a) original EU network with 217 nodes, (b) remaining EU networkafter a series of attacks on 40 nodes, and (c) the change of the normalized size of the largest con-nected component (LCC). The node size is proportional to its degree and the node color is given byDBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996).
Figure 2:	Overview of the policy architecture of ResiNet to select two rewiring edges.
Figure 3:	Illustration of the edge rewiring and the rewiring order. (a) The undirected example graphas the state; (b) Edges with random directions are candidates when selecting the first edge; (c) All2M directed edges can be candidates when selecting the second edge, subject to that it forms arewiring with the first edge; (d) The resultant graph after the rewiring, with the removal of AC, BDand the introduction of AB, CD.
Figure 4: The inductive ability of ResiNet on the test dataset (BA-10-30) when optimizing (a) net-work resilience, (b) network utility, and (c) their combination.
Figure 5: Illustration of the graph connectivity-based measurement calculation with a scale-freeexample graph under node degree-based malicious attack. Each snapshot demonstrates the attackon the red node, which removes the red node and its adjacent (dashed) edges, leading to a nextremnant graph. The attacker recalculates the node degree and repeatedly seeks for the remainingnode with a maximum degree as the next target. In the end, the entire graph becomes disconnectedwhen each node cannot reach other nodes.
Figure 6: Experiments on the BA-15 dataset to study the effect of the filtration order on FireGNN inmaximizing resilience. Results are averaged over 3 runs.
Figure 7: The resilience maximization on the BA-15 dataset with 15 nodes and 27 edges with (a)original network, (b)-(j) results of defending the node degree-based attack with different combina-tions of resilience and utility, and (k)-(s) results of defending against the node betweenness-basedattack with varying combinations of resilience and utility. For three resilience metrics, R denotesthe graph connectivity-based resilience metric; SR is the spectral radius; SR represents the alge-braic connectivity. For two utility metrics, Eglobal denotes the global efficiency, and Elocal is thelocal efficiency.
Figure 8: Pareto points obtained by ResiNet of balancing various combinations of resilience andutility on the BA-15 dataset. The resilience metric is the graph connectivity-based resilience, andthe utility metric is the global efficiency. Results are averaged over three runs.
Figure 9: The inductive ability of ResiNet on the test dataset (BA-20-200) when optimizing (a)network resilience and (b) the combination of resilience and utility.
Figure 10: Visualizations of the original EU network and optimized networks using ResiNet withdifferent objectives: R means the connectivity-based resilience measurement and EglObal is theglobal efficiency.
