Figure 1:	Increasing a molecule’s octanol-water partition coefficient with C5T5. (1) A molec-ular fragment (acetyloxy) is identified in a molecule of interest. (2) The molecular fragment isreplaced with a mask token (<mask>) and the property value is set to the desired bucket (<high>).
Figure 2:	Visual representations of IUPAC names and SMILES. Tokens in IUPAC names corre-spond to well-known functional groups and moieties. In contrast, tokens in SMILES correspond toindividual atoms and bonds.
Figure 3: T-SNE visualization of the word2vec embedding space. “Charge”: tokens that indi-cate formal charge. “Group”: functional groups and moieties. “Count/Mult”: multipliers. “Ringloc.”: fused-ring locants. “Stereo”: stereochemistry markers. “Locants”: simple locants. “Ele-ments”: single-atom tokens. As shown, the 2D location of tokens carries high semantic meaning;for example, locants are not only collocated, but are approximately in order.
Figure 4: Calculated property values of optimized molecules vs. original. Values computed for30 randomly chosen starting molecules. Top left: octanol-water partition coefficient. Top right:octanol-water distribution coefficient at pH of 7. Bottom left: molar refractivity. Bottom right: polarsurface area. Blue violins show the distribution of generated molecule properties when the modelwas asked to complete molecules to achieve a <high> property value, and red for <low>. Cutoffsbetween <high> and <med> and between <med> and <low> are shown as dashed blue and redlines, respectively. The black dashed line is y=x. Black vertical lines show best in dataset baselinefor each trial molecule.
Figure 5: Visualizations of base and logP-optimized molecules. Two molecules from the IogPplot in Figure 4, with three C5T5-optimized molecules for each of <low> and <high> logP.
Figure 6: Histograms of Tanimoto similarity to base molecules, synthetic accessibility of generatedmolecules (both as computed in (Jin et al., 2020)), and logP increase for 30 random base moleculesfrom the Zinc test set.
Figure 7: Number of molecular pairs in Zinc that pass a Tanimoto similarity threshold (x-axis) and alogP-difference threshold (different curves). Even for moderate similarity and logP thresholds, therequickly become vanishingly few usable molecular pairs. There are 24 × 109 total unique molecularpairs.
