Figure 1: Part of a fair generative model that intends to yield generated samples with the equal sizeover demographic groups. We employ training data {x(biia)s}im=b1ias (potentially biased) and balancedreference data {xr(eif)}im=re1f. The entire structure of the proposed model will be illustrated in detail inFig. 2. Here mbias (or mref ) denotes the number of training samples (or reference samples).
Figure 2: The architecture of the proposed three-player optimization, reflected in equation 6.
Figure 3: (Top) Generated samples by Choi et al. (2020) trained on CelebA-single with 10% referenceset size. Faces above the yellow line are female (57 pictures), while the rest are male (43). Intra FIDvalues are around 21.07 (female) and 25.74 (male); (Bottom) Generated samples by the proposedapproach under the same setting. We obtain 54 females and 46 males, yet producing more realisticsample images, reflected in a much lower intra FID values, around 9.51 (female) and 14.29 (male).
Figure 4: Fairness-quality tradeoff curves evaluated on CelebA-single With 10% reference set. Eachpoint is obtained With a particular λ, the tuning knob in our frameWork. Blue dot points indicateperformances for female group, and green dots are for male group.
Figure 5: Generated samples trained on CelebA-single with 25% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are female, while the rest are male.
Figure 6: Generated samples trained on CelebA-multi with 10% reference set size. Faces above thered line are samples without black hair, while the rest are black hair.
Figure 7: Generated samples trained on CelebA-multi with 25% reference set size. Faces above thered line are samples without black hair, while the rest are black hair.
Figure 8: Generated samples trained on UTKFace with 10% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are white, while the rest are non-white.
Figure 9: Generated samples trained on UTKFace with 25% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are white, while the rest are non-white.
Figure 10: Generated samples trained on FairFace with 10% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are white, while the rest are black.
Figure 11: Generated samples trained on FairFace with 25% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are white, while the rest are black.
Figure 12: Generated samples trained on CelebA-single with 5% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are female, while the rest are male.
Figure 13: Generated samples trained on CelebA-single with 2.5% reference set size. Faces abovethe yellow line are female, while the rest are male.
Figure 14: Generated samples trained on CelebA-single with 1% reference set size. Faces above theyellow line are female, while the rest are male.
