Figure 1: (a) The Cheetah task with six action dimensions. (b) The dynamics can be decomposed intomultiple sub-dynamics in various ways, each sub-dynamics is described with different backgroundcolors. (c) Dynamics can be traced to the impact caused by the action, and for each sub-dynamics,We show the meanings of the action dimensions it traced to. (d) The model error comparison on theCheetah task of Dreamer and D2P-Dreamer methods (D2P-Dreamer-Role/POSitiOn correspond todecompose the dynamics according to role/position and model each sub-dynamics separately).
Figure 2: Overview of the world model under ED2 Framework. ED2 contains two components:SD2 and D2P. SD2 decomposes the dynamics by generating partition G on action dimensions. D2Pdecomposes action a into multiple sub-actions according to G and makes decomposing predictionsbased on S and each sub-action. The prediction h is the combined output of all sub-dynamics models,from which the next state s0 and reward r are generated.
Figure 3: Extension of RSSM with D2P.
Figure 4: Comparisons of ED2-Dreamer vs. Dreamer. The x- and y-axis represent the training stepsand performance. The line and shaded area denotes the mean value and standard deviation.
Figure 5:	Performance comparisons of components ablation experiments.
Figure 6:	The model error (KL-Divergence) comparison of ED2-Dreamer and Dreamer.
Figure 7: The performance comparison of Dreamer, ED2-Dreamer, ED2-CD-Dreamer and ED2-HP-Dreamer. We provide the sub-dynamics visualization in the left four figures. Each circle correspondto a joint. A joint contains multiple action dimensions when the corresponding circle is separatedinto multiple parts. We mark the action dimensions in the same sub-dynamics with the same color.
Figure 8:	The model error reduced when combine ED2 with Dreamer.
Figure 9:	Comparisons between ED2-CD-Dreamer and Dreamer.
Figure 10: Performance comparisons between ED2-MBPO and MBPO.
Figure 11: Model error comparisons between ED2-MBPO and MBPO.
Figure 12: Performance comparisons between ED2-CD-MBPO and MBPO.
Figure 13: The visualization of final partition of environments in DeepMind Control Suite. Somejoints in humanoid is divided into two or three parts (e.g. abdomen joint). It indicates that thereare multiple action dimensions contained by this joint (e.g. abdomen joint contains abdomen_x,abdomen_y and abdomen_z action dimensions).
Figure 14: The visualization of final partition of environments in Gym-Mujoco.
Figure 16: The performance of Dreamer under bigger parameter size.
Figure 15: Model error experiments on Atari and Atari like maze environment.
