Figure 1: BIGRoC results: left: images of3 classes (birds, cars and trucks) generated by BigGAN(Brock et al., 2019), trained on CIFAR-10. Right: the enhanced versions of these images, attainedby the proposed BIGRoC algorithm.
Figure 2: Demonstration of the perceptually aligned gradients phenomenon on CIFAR-10: the origi-nal image (left) is perturbed via a targeted PGD attack to maximize the probability of different targetclasses. This experiment is done with a robust and a non-robust classifiers of the same architecture- ResNet50 (H. et al., 2016). The top row shows the results for the robust classifier and the bottomfor the non-robust one. We specify below each image the relevant classifier’s certainty (denoted asP), and the effective `2 norm of the perturbation δ (denoted as ). For each of the generated images,the attacked classifier reaches absolute certainty (P = 1). As can be seen, an adversarial attack(PGD) on a robust classifier leads to a significant addition of perceptual features aligned with thetarget class. This phenomenon does not occur at all on the non-robust classifier. Although bothnetworks use the same threat model ∆, we see that the attack on the non-robust classifier does notutilize the entire threat model and perturbs the image in a seemingly insignificant way, but still ableto completely fool it. Experimental settings: ∆ = {δ : kδk2 ≤ },	= 30, T = 60,α = T = 0.5.
Figure 3: Demonstration of the debiasing technique: We show 100 generated images by an uncon-ditional SNGAN and the results of the BIGRoC algorithm, with and without the proposed debi-asing. As can be seen, the outputs of the boosting algorithms are perceptually superior, while thehistograms expose the fact that the suggested debiasing algorithm induces a more uniform labels’distribution. In the ”Boosting without Debiasing” experiment, 36 out of 100 images are classified asdeers, and only 3 are horses. The most prominent deer images are marked in red. However, whenapplying the debiased boosting, the number of deers is reduced to 9, and the number of horses isincreased to 15. We mark the boosted images that remain deer in red, and images that are modifiedto other minority classes in green. As can be seen, many of the deers were changed to be horses,a perceptually similar class.
Figure 4: The effect of the threat model’s choice: generated images via a conditional GAN (left)are perturbed via a targeted PGD attack to maximize the probability of their target classes (planes,cars and birds) using either '∞ or '2 threat models. The boosted outputs attained by the '∞ entirelychange the structure of the images and lead to unnatural results. Using the `2 threat model leads topleasing and better results, as claimed. Experimental settings: In the `2 case, we usee = 10, T = 30, α = T = 3, which leads to good visual results. In order to make a sensiblecomparison with the '∞, We measure the perturbation of each pixel made by the '2-based boostingalgorithm and calculate the 70% percentile of the perturbations, denoted as q0.7. Namely, q0.7 islarger than 70% of the perturbations done by our method using the '2 threat model. For the '∞ case,we set e to be equal to the q0.7, while leaving the other hyperparameters unchanged.
Figure 5: The qualitative enhancement obtained by BIGRoC: We show 6 pairs of sets of images,each containing 10 images, one per CIFAR-10 class. Each set consists of images generated by acertain GAN (left) and their BIGRoC boosted version (right). This demonstrates the significantvisual enhancement achieved, both in conditional and unconditional image generation schemes.
Figure 6: Image interpolation demonstration on ImageNet images. The interpolation process isachieved by an alternation of e according to e = C ∙ ∣∣xt - x§ ∣∣2, c ∈ (0,1].
Figure 7: A qualitative comparison between BigGAN generated images of CIFAR-10 samples andthe proposed BIGRoC algorithm.
Figure 8: A qualitative comparison between an unconditional VAE generated images of CIFAR-10samples and the proposed BIGRoC algorithm.
Figure 9: A qualitative comparison between an unconditional WGAN-GP generated images ofCIFAR-10 samples and the proposed BIGRoC algorithm.
Figure 10: A qualitative comparison between an unconditional SSGAN generated images of CIFAR-10 samples and the proposed BIGRoC algorithm.
Figure 11: Additional image interpolation results using robust and non-robust classifiers accordingto our proposed method.
