Figure 1: Overview of the Lookahead-DRO procedure. Starting from parameters θ0, the optimaltraining weights W are chosen such that the resulting parameters θW minimize the worst case loss.
Figure 2: Synthetic multitask experiment. The outlier task is shown in red while the others are inyellow. The grayed out area represents the region in space that cannot be attained by the model withour chosen parameterizationTo gain a better understanding of the various trade-offsof each approach in terms of average and worst accuracy,we do not report a single number. Rather, we periodi-cally evaluate the trained models on the test set and reportthe Pareto frontier of all checkpoints (across epochs andhyper-parameter configurations) of each method in the twodimensional plane of worst and average accuracy.
Figure 4: Average/worst task accuracy Pareto frontiers on multitask CIFAR-100 for L-DRO withdifferent interaction matrix update intervals. Each plot corresponds to a different random seed.
Figure 5: Worst-case accuracy training curves for CIFAR-100 with η = 1, λ = 0.001 and interactionmatrix update intervals 10 (blue), 100 (orange) and 1000 (green). The curves are smoothed with arunning exponential average for readability.
Figure 6: Average/worst task accuracy Pareto frontiers across 3 random seeds on multitask CIFAR-100B.2	Additional BaselineAnother natural baseline for trading off worst and average accuracy is to optimize a weighted averageof average and worst-case task loss:1Nmin a X — £'i (θ) + (1 - α) X max 'i (θ)i=1with some interpolation parameter α. A downside of this approach is that, forα > 0, the model cannot,in general, reach the minimal worst-case loss because of the nonzero “average loss” component.
Figure 7: Average/worst task accuracy Pareto frontiers across 3 random seeds on multitask CIFAR-100, including additional baseline.
Figure 8: Average/worst task accuracy Pareto frontiers across 3 random seeds on multitask CIFAR-100various method vanishes. Although L-DRO tends to achieve similar robust accuracy as DRO at higheraverage accuracy, the difference is small but not consistent across the different runs.
