Figure 1: Two illustrative cases of our motivation for code editing learning with few exemplars, ratherthan with only one. The purple rectangles on the right part show the incorrect and correct solutionswithout or with multiple exemplars composition, respectively, in both Case (a) and (b). The editingwith one exemplar may be dominated by the inductive bias learned from limited samples and thuslead to an infeasible solution. With few support exemplars, the desirable solution can be reached.
Figure 2: Performance of code editing with various K support exemplars, where the integer K ∈ [3, 7]along the x-axis. Left is on C#Fixer dataset Split #1, and right is on PyFixer dataset Split #1. Anestimated regression model is plotted for every group of data by the seaborn package, showing as thestraight line with deviations. Our approach consistently benefit from adding more support exemplarsand is capable to find a better composition, while the other two baselines do not enjoy that.
Figure 3: Experiments on multi-extent parameter λ and its ensemble. The y-axis represents theinstantiated value of λ, where the plus symbol denotes the ensemble of the two extents, and ’Ensemble’includes all these four. Left: C#Fixer dataset Split #1; Right: PyFixer dataset Split #1.
Figure 4: Macro accuracy on C#Fixer dataset using Graph2Edit. ‘comp.’ is abbreviated for composi-tion and ‘non-comp.’ is abbreviated for non-composition. Blue dots represented the average accuracyover a split obtained by using one exemplar in the support set, indexing from 1 to 5, respectively. Or-ange dots is the accuracy achieved by our proposed method. Our compositional method consistentlyoutperforms the results using only one exemplar that suffers from variance in code editing.
Figure 5: Visualization of normalized node activation with λ = 1.0 on query snippet and two supportexemplars. We plot the top six nodes with the highest activation for each tree and show them indecreasing color saturation. Abstract syntax trees are plotted after pruning on insignificant parts.
