Figure 1: Our feature-based and analogy-basedexplanations of similarity between two input sen-tences. The former is represented by shading(darker is more important) derived from row sumsof the matrix in Figure 2b. The latter suggests thatthe presence of more context in one of the sen-tences - dolphin scheme in the input, Singaporebeing a small city-state in the analogy - is impor-tant in explaining the black box’s similarity score,whereas details such as the particular scheme orwords such as “foreign companies” or “fishing op-erations” may not be required.
Figure 2: Contributions to distance based on feature-based explanation with full A matrix (FbFull).
Figure 3: % accuracies from our user study (higher values are better). The left, center and rightfigures are overall results, results for short sentences and results for long sentences respectively. Theerror bars are one standard error. We observe that overall our proposed AbE and FbbFull methodsare (statistically) significantly better than other approaches. P-values based on paired t-tests forour approaches being (statistically) equal to the second best approaches confirm this and are asfollows: AbE-PDash is 1.66 × 10-9, FbFull-PDash is 2.92 × 10-5, AbE-FbDiag is 3.28 × 10-9 andFbFull-FbDiag is 3.36 × 10-5. Looking at specific cases we see that for short sentences DirSim wasthe most competitive (center figure), while for long sentences FbDiag was (right figure). However,our methods (AbE and FbFull) remain consistently better in both of these scenarios.
Figure 4: Mean absolute errors (infidelity) of the analogy explanation methods’ predictions withrespect to the black box predictions for varying number of analogies. The solid lines are the meanover 5 CV folds, and the shaded areas show 1 standard error of the mean. Lower values are better.
Figure 5: Pearson’s r of the analogy explanation methods’ predictions with respect to the black boxpredictions for varying number of analogies. The solid lines are the mean over 5 CV folds, and theshaded areas show 1 standard error of the mean. Higher values are better.
Figure 6: Contributions to distance according to the feature-based explanation with full A matrix(FbFull) with MEPS data.
Figure 7:	Contributions to distance according to the feature-based explanation with MEPS data forexample 1 (BB dist. = 0.022). x1 and x2 are the two points in the example pair shown and a value of1 means the feature is active, and 0 means inactive.
Figure 8:	Contributions to distance according to the feature-based explanation with MEPS data forexample 2 (BB dist. = 0.584). x1 and x2 are the two points in the example pair shown and a value of1 means the feature is active, and 0 means inactive.
Figure 9: In the top and middle we see examples of analogy and feature based explanations presentedin the user study. On the bottom we see the instructions page for the user study.
Figure 10: Contributions to distance based on feature-based explanation with full A matrix (FbFull).
