Figure 2: 1D and 2D piecewiselinear basis functions (colored)and function built from themLagrange basis functions do not have tunable parameters and havecompact support which leads to sparse Φ,①⑷ and Φ. For thepiecewise linear basis the interpolant uf (t, x) can be constructeddirectly from the predictions by setting α(t) = u(t). However, (grey). Black dots represent ob-constructing uf (t, x) for a higher order basis, e.g. piecewise servation points.
Figure 4: Effects of amount of data and grid sizes on relative errors and constraint violations for theCahn-Hilliard equation. All results are for the test set. Constraint violations are evaluated as the meanabsolute violation of the constraint, | JQ Uf (t, x)dx - C| over all simulations and time points. Inmost simulations C ≈ 0.5.
Figure 3: 1D spatial grid forthe Cahn-Hilliard equation.
Figure 5: Grid forthe heat equation.
Figure 6: Comparison of data with predic-tions of unconstrained and constrained mod-els trained on 30 simulations, full spatialgrid and using PWL basis for the constrainedmodel. The predictions are for a test case.
Figure 7: Effects of amount of data and grid sizes on relative errors and constraint violations for theheat equation. Results are for the test set. Constraint violations are evaluated as the mean absoluteviolation of the constraint d∂Uχf ≥ 0 over all simulations and time points.
Figure 8: First row: LD, LC and histograms ofdivergences of samples from data, constrained andunconstrained WGANs. Second row: LD , LCand histograms of Laplacians of samples fromdata, constrained and unconstrained WGANs. Con-h(u) = d∂χ1 + d∂y2 = 0. The constraint is en-forced using the PWL basis. We generated adataset with 10k divergence-free fields on an straints are evaluated at cell centroids.
Figure 9: Magnitudes of random samples from the dataset, unconstrained and constrained WGANs.
Figure 10: Examples of simulations for the Cahn-Hilliard equation on a unit interval.
Figure 11: Examples of simulations for the heat equation on a unit square.
Figure 12: Constraint violation plots for the Cahn-Hilliard equation. Each panel shows the meanabsolute violation of the constraint, | JQ Uf (t, x)dx - C|, over all train/test simulations for each timepoint.
Figure 13: Relative errors and constraint violations for a GNN trained on the Cahn-Hilliard equation.
Figure 14: Grid used for training GANs.
