Figure 1: Summary of our proposed methods P-SIL and P-DAC. Top: P-SIL, i) encodes the agentoa and expert oe trajectories into a latent space, ii) computes a cost matrix C and iii) transportmap π? between these to iv) produce imitation rewards r1:T . Bottom: P-DAC, i) encodes the(data-augmented) agent oa and expert oe trajectories into a latent space, ii) passes them throughthe discriminator, and iii) evaluates the DAC loss. iv) Rewards r1:T can then be produced with thediscriminator.
Figure 2: Our agents P-DAC and P-SIL demonstrate superior performance over vanilla instantiationsof DAC and SIL, as well as BC over a set of challenging image-based tasks from DMC. In many casesP-DAC and P-SIL are able to recover the expert performance by Using only 10 expert trajectories.
Figure 3: Performance of P-DAC, P-SIL, and data-augmented BC on DeepMind control suite tasksfrom pixel observations only with wall-clock time as axis. We notice P-SIL and P-DAC solve alltasks in less than 4 hoUrs.
Figure 5: Ablation study on the number of demonstration. We train all P-DAC, P-SIL and BCon 1, 10 and 50 demonstrations. We observe P-DAC and P-SIL are robust to the number ofdemonstrations, while BC is not, and fails on most tasks for the 1-demonstration setting.
Figure 6: Ablation study on data augmentation (DA). We compare P-DAC, P-SIL and BC with andwithout data augmentation. We observe the gap in performance between data-augmented (DA) andno-data-augmented (No DA) implementations to be large. For instance, our baselines do not recoverany meaningful behaviors on finger spin, cheetah run, acrobot swingup, and walker environmentswithout DA.
Figure 7: Ablation study on the distance between trajectories for P-SIL. We compare our approach(OT alignment with cosine cost), to the cosine distance and the Euclidean distance between trajectories(without OT). We observe that OT significantly outperform non-OT approaches. In particular, ourbaselines without OT do not recover any meaningful behaviors on finger spin and cheetah run, andare weaker on acrobot swingup and walker run. Hence, OT alignment is also an essential componentof P-SIL.
Figure 8: Ablation study on the need for expert actions. We train P-DAC with and without actionsconcatenated to observations (the former is privileged). We observe the performance gap to bemarginal, hence actions are not necessary in the considered environments, contrarily to popularbeliefs on GAIL-like algorithms.
Figure 9:	Ablation study on the number of demonstration. We train all P-DAC, P-SIL and BCon 1, 10 and 50 demonstrations. We observe P-DAC and P-SIL are robust to the number ofdemonstrations, while BC is not, and fails on most tasks for the 1-demonstration setting.
Figure 10:	Ablation study on data augmentation (DA). We compare P-DAC, P-SIL and BC with andwithout data augmentation. We observe the gap in performance to be significantly larger for P-DACand P-SIL, showing that DA is a crucial component of our methods.
Figure 11:	Ablation study on the distance between trajectories for P-SIL. We compare our approach(OT alignment with cosine cost), to the cosine distance and the Euclidean distance between trajectories(without OT). We observe that OT significantly outperform non-OT approaches. Hence, OT alignmentis also an essential component of P-SIL.
Figure 12: Ablation study on the need for expert actions. We train P-DAC with and without actionsconcatenated to observations (the former is privileged). We observe the performance gap to bemarginal, hence actions are not necessary in the considered environments, contrarily to popularbeliefs on GAIL-like algorithms.
