Figure 1: States and actions arerepresented by circles and arcs.
Figure 2: A bi-directional four-queue networkThere are two servers in the system. Server 1 only serves Queue 1 or Queue 4 with service ratesμ⅛ = 0.3 and μ4 = 0.3 respectively, and where Server 2 similarly only serves Queue 2 or Queue 3at the rates of μ2 = 0.3 and μ3 = 0.3. Arrivals occur at a rate of λ⅛ = 0.2 and λ2 = 0.2 at Queues1 and 3 respectively. An arrival that gets served at Queue 1 by Server 1 then progresses to Queue 2,and only leaves the system after it has been served by Server 2. Likewise, arrivals at Queue 3 haveto be served by Server 2, before moving on to Queue 4 to be served by Server 1 in order to leavethe system. Each queue i has a maximum length of Li = 9, and a customer is rejected at a queue ifthe queue is at its full capacity. Conversely, an empty queue remains at length 0 even if an action istaken to serve that queue.
Figure 3: Ex-ante Fairness of various algorithms in a queuing networkFigure 3 plots the quantity Ψ against T under the 5 algorithms. Notice in Figure 3 how the Of-fline and Online-ReOpt algorithms, as well as the Meta Algorithm by Zahavy et al. (2021) performsimilarly well in terms of ex-ante fairness. Among them, the Meta Algorithm has the best perfor-mance, since the Re-Optimization schedule in our proposed algorithms compromises the ex-antefairness objective. All algorithms demonstrate converging behavior, in the sense that the error barsdiminishes as T grows.
Figure 4: Ex-post Fairness of various algorithms in a queuing networkFigure 4 plots the quantity Γ against T under the 5 algorithms. In terms of ex-post fairness, the Of-fline and Online-ReOpt algorithms perform significantly better than Meta Algorithm and the LongerQueue First Heuristic. The sub-optimality of the Meta Algorithm corroborates with Section 3.2 thatpolicies designed for the ex-ante fairness objective could be far from optimal for the ex-post fairnessobjective. While the Meta Algorithm has a similar performance to the Longer Queue First heuristic,the former has a significantly wider error bar than the latter, meaning that the latter is more stable.
Figure 5: Type k-rewards for 1 ≤ k ≤ K of various algorithms in a queuing network. Figure is readfrom left to right, top to bottom.
