Figure 1: Diagram of proposed SCG. (a) Stage one. Train T-VAE model to learn the representation ofstructured data. (b) Stage two. Integrate node-level and edge-level knowledge during the generation,and generate controllable samples for the downstream task.
Figure 2: (a) Example of tree of a scene with four types of nodes, where the index (n, i) is explainedin (2). The purple and green nodes are internal nodes with 4 child nodes. (b) The breaking processof a 2D space. The color is corresponding to the node type in (a). (c) The knowledge integrationexample described in Section 2.2: the child nodes of the blue color node should have red color.
Figure 3: Results of synthetic scene reconstruction experiment from 5 methods with random andgood initialization. I shows the results of T-VAE using SCG. With the combination of knowledge1 3 we can almost reach the optimal solution even from a random initialization, while baselinemethods can realize the target only when start from the good initialization.
Figure 4: (a) Target scene. (b) Knowledge losses of integrating semantic rules 1 3 separately. (c)The influence of knowledge to the trajectories with same initialization. (d) After applying explicitknowledge, optimization trajectories are diverse when start from different initialization.
Figure 5: The IoU values during the attack process of four victim models on two backgrounds.
Figure 6: Scene generated by SceneAttack follows basic traffic rules,while scene generated by Pose At-tack violates basic physical laws.
Figure 7: The pipeline of LiDAR scene generation with our developed model.
Figure 8: The definition of each module in our proposed T-VAE. A: There are 5 kinds of nodesin Synthetic Scene Reconstruction experiment. Therefore, we have 5 encoders and 5 decoders intotal, plus a Classifier and a Sampler. B: There are 5 kinds of nodes in the LiDAR scene experiment.
Figure 9: An example of the encoding and decoding processes of our T-VAE model. The circles havethe same meaning as in Figure 8.
Figure 10: We randomly generate 10 samples by sampling in the latent space of VAE, GVAE, andT-VAE.
Figure 11:Point Attack method with the Intersection background.
Figure 12: More results for Pose Attack method with the Intersection background.
Figure 13: More results for Scene Attack method with the Intersection background.
