Figure 1: Decision regions for models trained via standard training Lstd, adversarial training LTRADES(Zhang et al., 2019a), and our training LERA (Equation 5). In this case, our training achieves the samerobust accuracy as LTRADES but avoids all robust inaccurate samples by making them non-robust.
Figure 2: Robust accuracy (Racc) and robust inaccuracy (R-犷)of existing robust models ( , k)fine-tuned with our proposed loss (O, ∙). Our approach consistently reduces the number of robustinaccurate samples across various datasets, existing models and at different regularization levels β .
Figure 3: Comparison of different abstain approaches including existing robust classifiers TRADESRI(△, ), classifiers fine-tuned with our proposed loss ERARI (O, ∙), selection network ( , ∙) and softmaxresponse ( , ) abstain models. The higher Rrob and Racc,the better (top right corner is optimal).
Figure 4: NatUral(Rnat) and robust accuracy (Racc) for 2-compositional ERARI models (O, ∙)and2-compositional TRADESRI models (Δ, ). Further, We also consider 2-compositional ACE-COLTsn,ACE-IBPSN ( , ), and 2-compositional TRADESSR ( , ) models. The core models used in thecompositional architectures are listed in Appendix A.8.
Figure 5: Illustration of Mapillary Traffic Sign Dataset (MTSD) samples. The base dataset consists ofstreet-level images that include annotated ground truth bounding boxes locating the traffic signs (a).
Figure 6:	Robust selection (Rsreolb) and robust accuracy (Rraoccb) for CIFAR-10 softmax response (SR)abstain models (F, SSR), for varying threshold τ ∈ [0, 1) and using the WideResNet-28-10 classifierF by Carmon et al. (2019). Each SR abstain model is evaluated via APGD (Croce & Hein, 2020) andAPGDconf (Equation 21).
Figure 7:	Robust accuracy (Racc) and robust inaccuracy (R-Or) of existing robust models ( , Dfine-tuned with our proposed loss (O, ∙). Our approach consistently reduces the number of robustinaccurate samples across various datasets, existing models and at different regularization levels β .
Figure 8:	Comparison of different abstain approaches including existing robust classifiers TRADESRI(Δ, ), classifiers fine-tuned with our proposed loss ERARI (O, ∙), selection network ( , ∙) and softmaxresponse ( , ) abstain models. The higher Rrob and Racc,the better (top right corner is optimal).
Figure 9:	NatUral(Rnat) and robust accuracy (Racc) for 2-compositional ERARI models (O, ∙)and2-compositional TRADESRI models (Δ, ). Further, We also consider 2-compositional ACE-COLTsn,ACE-IBPSN ( , ), and 2-compositional TRADESSR ( , ) models. The core models used in thecompositional architectures are listed in Appendix A.8.
