Figure 1: A comparison between the Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) and MixRL on a small regressiondataset where each example (circle) is associated with a single-dimensional feature (x-axis). (a)Mixup takes a linear interpolation of all possible example pairs. Unfortunately, the mixed examples(stars) do not properly reflect the function f (blue plot) where some labels are arbitrarily incorrect.
Figure 2: Using the Product dataset described in Sec. 4, (a) as the data distances between mixedexamples increase, the RMSE (lower is better) of a model trained on the augmented training setinitially decreases, but then gradually increases; (b) similar observations are made when increasingthe label distances; and (c) the data and label Euclidean distances do not have a linear relationship.
Figure 3: MixRL’s framework. Given a random batch of examples from the training set, each exam-ple is combined with a one-hot encoding feature containing a random number of nearest neighbors tomix in terms of data or label distance. The Mixup value network hθ is a neural network that returnsprobabilities in proportion to how helpful mixing an example with its neighbors is. The examplesare then randomly selected according to the probabilities and mixed with their nearest neighborsin the training set. The random batch is augmented with the mixed examples and used to train aregression model fφ . The validation loss is used to update the Mixup value network. We also usereward scaling and employ a baseline function that takes the moving average of previous losses.
Figure 4: Spectrum generation on a 3-d semiconductor for the Product dataset.
Figure 5: (a) For NO2, the label RMSE increases for larger (normalized) data or label distances. (b)Similar label RMSE trends for Product. (c) For NO2, the data and label distances do not have alinear relationship. (d) For NO2, the regression model’s RMSE increases for larger data distances.
Figure 6: (a)-(b) kNN option frequency histograms for two real datasets. (c)-(d) Model accuracy vs.
Figure 7: kNN option frequency histograms for the (a) Synthetic dataset and (b) Airfoil dataset.
Figure 8: Model accuracy vs. validation set size for the Airfoil dataset.
Figure 9: MixRL’s accuracy for different λ values on the NO2 and Product datasets.
