Figure 1: Example of harmless heterophily2021) also point out the insufficiency of Hnode by examples to show that different graph typologieswith the same Hnode(G) can carry different label information.
Figure 2: Comparison of baseline performance under different homophily metrics.
Figure 3: Example of how diversification operation addresses harmfulheterophilysome cases of harmful heterophily. From the node-wise analysis, we argue that aggregation (LPfilter) and diversification (HP filter) should be combined together as a filterbank (Ekambaram, 2014)for feature extraction and different nodes may have different needs for the information processed bydifferent filters. Based on the above argument, we generalize filterbank method and propose AdaptiveChannel Mixing framework in subsection 4.2 to address heterophily challenge.
Figure 4: Comparison of selected baseline GNNs (red), ACM-baseline (green), ACMII-baseline(blue) with SOTA (magenta) models on 6 selected datasets. The black line and the error bar indicatethe standard deviation. The Symbol"f" means the amount of improvement of the best ACM-baselineand ACM-baseline over the SOTA models. See Appendix H for a detailed discussion of the relationbetween HaMgg and the performance of GNNs.
Figure 5: Synthetic experiments for edge homophily on regular graphs.
Figure 6:	Comparison of test accuracy (mean ± std) of MLP-1, SGC-1 and ACM-SGC-1 on syntheticdatasets24Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20220.00.0Q∙8∙64 2Ioooo0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0Modified Aggregation Homophily(a) syn-CoraQ∙8∙64 2Ioooo0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0Modified Aggregation Homophily(d) syn-Chameleon0.00.0O-8-64 2Ioooo
Figure 7:	Comparison of test accuracy (mean ± std) of MLP-2, GCN and ACM-GCN on syntheticdatasetsIn order to separate the effects of nonlinearity and graph structure, we compare sgc with 1 hop(sgc-1) with MLP-1 (linear model). For GCN which includes nonlinearity, we use MLP-2 as itscorresponding graph-agnostic baseline model. We train the above GNN models, graph-agnosticbaseline models and ACM-GNN models on all synthetic datasets and plot the mean test accuracywith standard deviation on each dataset. From Figure 6 and Figure 7, we can see that on each HaMgg(G)level, ACM-GNNs will not underperform baseline GNNs and the graph-agnostic models. But whenHaMgg(G) is small, baseline GNNs will be outperformed by graph-agnostic models by a large margin.
Figure 8:	Example of the case (the area in black box) that HP filter does not work well for harmfulheterophilyFrom the black box area of S(I - A, X) in the example in Figure 8 we can see that nodes in class1 and 4 assign non-negative weights to each other although there is no edge between them; nodesin class 2 and 3 assign non-negative weights to each other as well. This is because the surroundingdifferences of class 1 are similar as class 4, so are class 2 and 3. In real-world applications, when25Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022nodes in several small clusters connect to a large cluster, the surrounding differences of the nodes inthe small clusters will become similar. In such case, HP filter are not able to distinguish the nodesfrom different small clusters.
