Figure 1: AD problem settings. Blue and red dots are for labeled negative (normal) and positive(anomalous) samples, respectively. Grey dots denote unlabeled samples. While previous worksmostly focus on supervised (a, b) or semi-supervised (c, d, e) settings, we tackle an AD problemusing only unlabeled data (f) that may contain both negative and positive samples.
Figure 2: Performance of our proposed modeland a baseline OCC using contrastive repre-sentation [51] on CIFAR-10 with differentanomaly ratios in the training data.
Figure 3: Block diagram of SRR composed of representation learner (Sec. 3.2), data refinement(Sec. 3.1), and final OCC blocks. The representation learner updates the deep models using refineddata from the data refinement block. Data refinement is done by an ensemble of OCCs, each ofwhich is trained on K disjoint subsets of unlabeled training data. Samples predicted as normal by allclassifiers are retained in the refined data, and are used to update the representation learner and finalOCC. The process is repeated iteratively until convergence. Convergence graphs can be found in theAppendix A.8.
Figure 4: Unsupervised AD performance (F1-score) using OC-SVM (with rbf kernel), GOAD [7],and GOAD with the proposed method SRR on various tabular datasets. Shaded areas represent thestandard deviation.
Figure 5: Unsupervised AD performance with various OCCs on CIFAR-10. For SRR we adaptdistribution-augmented contrastive representation learning [51]. (Left) AUC, (Right) Average Preci-sion (AP).
Figure 6: Unsupervised AD performance on (a) MVTec (b) f-MNIST, and (c) Dog-vs-Cat datasetswith varying anomaly ratios. We use state-of-the-art one-class classification models for baselines,such as distribution-augmented contrastive representations [51] for f-MNIST and Dog-vs-Cat, orCutPaste [33] for MVTec, and build SRR on top of them.
Figure 7: Ablation studies on (top) CIFAR-10 and (bottom) MVTeC under 10% anomaly ratio settingwith respect to (a) ensemble count K, (b) percentile threshold γ, and (C) data refinement with orwithout representation update.
Figure 8: Percentage of excluded anomalous and normal samples by data refinement (a, b) withdifferent anomaly ratios in training data and (c, d) over training epochs for 10% anomaly ratio.
Figure 9: Performance of various OCCs on CIFAR-10 dataset. SRR is applied on top of Contrastive[51]. (Left) Recall at Precision 70, (Right) Recall at Precision 90.
Figure 10: Performance of SRR on (top) raw tabular features and (lower) learned image representa-tions. SRR consistently outperforms baseline and in some cases (e.g., Thyroid, and Contrastive [51]),the performance improvements are significant.
Figure 11: Unsupervised anomaly detection performances with Otsu’s method on top of SRR onMVTec dataset. (Left) AUC, (Right) Average Precision (AP).
Figure 12: Convergence graphs of SRR with (left) MVTec dataset, (right) CIFAR-10 dataset.
