Figure 1: A. Working process of classical kernel method and quantum kernel method. B. Basedon the IBM quantum computing platform, (1), (2), and (3) denote the feature maps of Z, ZZ, andZ-ZZ quantum kernel methods, respectively. Note that we only show one repetition here, and in theexperiments, the number of repetitions of each method is set to two.
Figure 2: Kernels Category3.2 The proposed patterns and criteria for judging QKMFirst, we would like to demonstrate the advantages of quantum kernel methods over classical kernelmethods when dealing with data patterns based on the Mersenne Twister random distribution. TheMersenne Twister is a pseudo random number generator which was first proposed by Matsumoto& Nishimura (1998). The Mersenne Twister is used as default pseudo random number generatorby many software, such as Python, R, and PHP. The Mersenne Twister random distribution is adistribution that be generated by the Mersenne Twister method.
Figure 3: The relationship between δ and the predicting accuracy in Ad hoc dataset. The top graphshows the training accuracy, and the bottom graph shows the testing accuracy.
Figure 4: A. The horizontal coordinates P1~P4 represent the data patterns of different difficulties ofthe geometric non-random dataset, respectively. B. The horizontal coordinates indicate the datasetsize, and the vertical coordinates indicate the prediction accuracy. B illustrates the relationshipbetween the prediction correctness and the size of the dataset under three patterns in the geometricrandom distribution dataset.
Figure 5: The top right panel shows the 45 datasets after visualization, and the bottom left panelshows the prediction accuracy of the five methods, which are SVM models based on Gaussian kernel,linear kernel, polynomial kernel, sigmoid kernel, and quantum kernel, respectively. The blue linerepresents the training set, and the red represents the test set. Red corners indicate the case where thetraining or test scores of the quantum kernel method outperform all classical kernel methods. Blackcorners indicate the case where the training or test scores of the quantum kernel method are worsethan any classical kernel method. Blue corners indicate the case where the training or test scores ofthe quantum kernel method are equal to the best value of all classical kernel methods.
Figure 6: The horizontal coordinate is the 81 training datasets, the left vertical coordinates indicatethe method prediction accuracy, and the right vertical coordinates indicate the value of δ . The greencircles represent the best classical kernel methods in RBF, Linear, Polynomial, and Sigmoid kernel-based kernel methods. The purple circles represent the quantum kernel methods. Under the samedataset, if the classical kernel method is not worse than the quantum kernel method, we use the greenvertical line to indicate how better the classical kernel method is than the quantum kernel methodand the black asterisk to indicate the magnitude of δ. Otherwise, we use the purple vertical line toindicate how better the quantum kernel method is than the classical kernel method and use the redasterisk to indicate the magnitude of δ.
Figure 7: The horizontal coordinate is the 68 training datasets, the left vertical indicates the method’sprediction accuracy, and the right vertical coordinate indicates the value of δ . The hollow blackcircles, red circles, orange circles, and pink circles represent the best classical kernel methods, Z-ZZquantum kernel-based, ZZ quantum kernel, and Z quantum kernel-based quantum kernel methods,respectively. We use blue asterisks to indicate the value of δ when the Z -quantum kernel-basedmethod is optimal, which has only one case, and orange asterisks to indicate the value of δ when theZZ -quantum kernel-based method is the best, although this case does not occur in the experiment.
