Figure 1: (a) Robust accuracy v.s. clean accuracy. The robust accuracy is evaluated by AutoAttack(Croce & Hein (2020)). The “Hybrid” class includes CNN-ViT, T2T-ViT and Swin-T as introducedin Section 3. Models with attention mechanisms have their names printed at the center of the cir-cles. ViTs have the best robustness against adversarial perturbations. Introducing other modulesto ViT can improve clean accuracy but hurt adversarial robustness. CNNs are more vulnerable toadversarial attacks. (b) Vision transformers and CNNs investigated in this paper.
Figure 2: ASR of transfer attack using FGSM With different attack radii. The rows stand for thesurrogate models used to generated adversarial examples. The columns stand for the target models.
Figure 3: Certification of ViT-S/16, ReSNet50and ResNet18 ImageNet classifiers using de-noised randomized smoothing (σ = 0.25).
Figure 4: Feature visualization: The learned low-level structure features are highlighted in blue(obviously perceptible) and green (minorly perceptible). The CNNs in the first row learn morelow-level features compared with the ViTs in the second row. The ViTs pay more attention to thelow-level structures and their feature maps become noisier when ResNet features are introduced(ViT-B/16-Res) or neighboring tokens are aggregated into one token recursively (T2T-ViT-24).
Figure 5: Filters for the frequency-based attack. The frequencies corresponding to the red partare filtered out, and the frequencies corresponding to the green part can pass through. “Full Pass”means all of the frequencies are preserved. “Low Pass” means only low-frequent components arepreserved. “High Pass” preserves the high-frequent part.
Figure 6: ASR of transfer attack using FGSM with different attack radii. The rows stand for thesurrogate models used to generated adversarial examples in the white-box attack approach. Thecolumns stand for the target models. Darker rows correlate to the source models that generate moretransferable adversarial examples. While darker columns mean that the target models are morevulnerable to the transfer attack.“Res50-ssl” and “Res50-swsl” are in short of “ResNeXt-32x4d-ssl”and “ResNet50-swsl” respectively.
Figure 7: Cross entropy loss versus varying PGD attack steps for ViT-S/16 and RestNet18. Thedashed lines corresponds to larger attach radius of 0.03 and the full lines to smaller attack radius of0.01.
Figure 8: Adversarial accuracy of the target models against PGD attack with different attack radii(“eps”) and attack steps (“steps”). When the attack radius and attack steps are increased, the adver-sarial accuracy of the target model decreases to zero. Darker blocks stand for more robust modelsagainst PGD attack.
