Figure 1: Loss landscapes w.r.t. architecture parameters α where the red star indicates the globalminimum. (a) illustrates the landscape with ω%t. (b) illustrates the landscape with ω*, which isobtained by training ω for 10 iterations. To fairly compare the landscapes in (a) and (b), we utilizethe same model and candidate α points. We observe the first-order approximation sharpens thelandscape. (c) displays the tracks of optimization path of DARTS and our ZARTS. Starting at thesame initial point, ZARTS can converge to the global minimum but DARTS fails.
Figure 2: Trends of accuracy and model size in the search process of DARTS and ZARTS for 200epochs on CIFAR-10. The top-1 accuracy is obtained by training models for 600 epochs.
Figure 3: Loss landscapes w.r.t. architecture parameters a. In (a), we illustrate the landscape withfirst-order approximation. In (b), we illustrate the landscape with second-order approximation. In(c), we obtain ω* by training network weights ω for 10 iterations, and illustrate the landscape w.r.t.
Figure 4: ESS Ne and ESR Re versus epochs with different sampling numbers N in the search stageon CIFAR-10. We fix iteration number M = 10 for all settings.
Figure 5: Trends of number of parameterless operations and identity operations in each normal cellsearched by different NAS methods on CIFAR-10 for 200 epochs. The parameterless operationsinclude max pooling, average pooling, and identity operation.
Figure 6: The architectures of normal and reduction cell searched by ZARTS on CIFAR-10 inDARTS’s search space. Model constructed by the above cells achieves 97.54% accuracy on theCIFAR-10 dataset with 3.5M parameters.
Figure 7:	The architectures of normal and reduction cell searched by ZARTS on CIFAR-100 inDARTS’s search space. Model constructed by the above cells achieves 84.54% accuracy on theCIFAR-100 dataset with 4.0M parameters.
Figure 8:	The architectures of normal and reduction cells searched by ZARTS on CIFAR-10 in thefour difficult search space of RDARTS. The left column shows the normal cells, while the rightcolumn shows the reduction cells.
Figure 9:	The architectures of normal and reduction cells searched by ZARTS on CIFAR-100 inthe four difficult search space of RDARTS. The left column shows the normal cells, while the rightcolumn shows the reduction cells.
Figure 10:	The architectures of normal and reduction cells searched by ZARTS on SVHN in the fourdifficult search space of RDARTS. The left column shows the normal cells, while the right columnshows the reduction cells.
Figure 11:	The derived architectures of normal cell every 25 epochs, which are searched by ZARTSon CIFAR-10 for 200 epochs.
Figure 12:	The derived architectures of reduction cell every 25 epochs, which are searched byZARTS on CIFAR-10 for 200 epochs.
