Figure 1: The figure illustrates a sample task where given an input x, the output is a set ofshapes (e.g., triangle, half-square, line). The partial order graph (middle) arranges the label spacesuch that specific labels (triangle) come before more general labels (line). Listing the specific labelsfirst gives the model more clues about the rest of the set, leading to more informative sequences.
Figure 2: Our method first builds a graph Gtover the set Yt , and then samples orders fromGt using topological sort (topo_sort). Thetopological sorting rejects samples that do notfollow the conditional probability constraints.
Figure 3: Generative process for simulation.
Figure 4: Effect of tsample on perplexity (left) and set overlap (right).
Figure 5: Left: label dependencies used by TSAMPLE for OPENENT: TSAMPLE puts specific enti-ties (e.g., volleyball) before generic ones (e.g., event). Right: TSAMPLE ((T)) consistently outper-forms UNIFORM ((U)) as n is increased.
Figure 6: The generative process for simulation% RandomnessFigure 7: Perplexity vs. Randomness for varyingblock sizesE.1 Major FindingsWe now outline our findings from the simulation. We use the architecture of bart-base Lewiset al. (2020) (six-layers of encoder and decoder) without pre-training for all simulations. All thesimulations were repeated using three different random seeds, and we report the averages.
Figure 7: Perplexity vs. Randomness for varyingblock sizesE.1 Major FindingsWe now outline our findings from the simulation. We use the architecture of bart-base Lewiset al. (2020) (six-layers of encoder and decoder) without pre-training for all simulations. All thesimulations were repeated using three different random seeds, and we report the averages.
Figure 8: Augmenting dataset with multiple orders help across block sizes. Augmentations alsoovercome any benefit that is obtained by using position embeddings.
Figure 9: Effect of TSAMPLE on perplexity and set overlap. Left: Augmentations done TSAMPLEhelps the model converge faster and to a lower perplexity. Right: Using TSAMPLE, the overlapbetween training and test set increases consistently, while consistently outperforming uniform.
Figure 10: Label dependencies used by tsample for go-emo (left) and reuters (right) showsthat the method puts specific entities before generic ones.
