Figure 1: Sample FSAL episodes using Celeb-A (left) and Zappos-50K (right). Positive and negative ex-amples are sampled according to attributes.
Figure 2: Visualization of few-shot classifiers using CAM (Zhou et al., 2016), on top of different repre-sentations. Left: Celeb-A; Right: Zappos-50K. Target attributes that define the episode are shown above andimages are from the query set of the positive class at test time.
Figure 3:	Task ambiguity and the effect of number of shots in FSALVisualizing few-shot classifiers: To understand and interpret the decision made by few-shot lin-ear classifiers, we visualize the classifier weights by using CAM (Zhou et al., 2016), and plot theheatmap over the 11×11 spatial feature map in Figure 2. SA sometimes shows incorrect localizationas it is not trained to classify those novel test attributes. SA* shows bigger but less precise heatmapssince the training objective encourages the propagation of attribute information spatially. In con-trast, our proposed method produces surprisingly accurate and localized heatmaps that pinpoint thelocation of the attributes (e.g. mustache or cheekbone); this is impressive since no labeled informa-tion concerning these attributes was available during representation learning. This result supportsthe hypothesis that local features can be good descriptors that match different views of the sameinstance during contrastive learning, and finetuning further establishes a positive transfer betweentraining and test attributes.
Figure 4:	Few-shot performance vs. transferability across training and test attributes. A: Transferabilityscore (T-score) is computed based on the AUC of a test attribute predicted by a logistic regression model on a setof training attributes. 100 different random splits across train/test attributes per split are used. B: Both episodicaccuracy and T-scores are recorded on 60,000 episodes (600 episodes per split). Episodes are grouped intothree bins in terms of their T-scores. C: Performance of training or finetuning on training attributes correlateswith T-score. Error bars are standard errors in each bin.
Figure 5: Additional visualization results, on 20-shot episodes, including more methods for comparison.
Figure 6: Visualization of Celeb-A 20-shot LR classifiers using CAM on top of UFTA representations.
Figure 7: Visualization of Zappos-50K 20-shot LR classifiers using CAM on top of UFTA representations.
Figure 8: Projecting data features into prototypical network embedding space (WA) for the linear toy problem.
