Figure 1: A) TRAKR setup overview. TRAKR consist of a reservoir connected to input and readoutunits via dedicated weights. Recurrent weights J and input weights win are aplastic. Only theoutput weights wout are subject to training. B) TRAKR equations for single unit activity, readoutunit activity and error term.
Figure 2: A) (Blue) wout plastic for a 15 Hz sin-function, and frozen for a 5 Hz rhythm. (Orange)Test pattern with the same frequencies but the signal order reversed. (Red) TRAKR output. (Green)The error signal, E(t), is showing an increase for the part of the test pattern which was not learnedduring training. B) Similar to A but wout were plastic during the second half of the training signal(5Hz rhythm).
Figure 3: Classification performance on the sequential-MNIST dataset Le et al. (2015). A MLP:Multi-layer perceptron (as in Fawaz et al. (2019)); ESN: echo-state network (twiESN, as in Fawazet al. (2019)); NB: Naive Bayes; DTW: Dynamic Time Warping (as in Rakthanmanon et al. (2012));MI: Mutual Information; Euc: Euclidean distance metric. TRAKR performs on par with MLPs,while outperforming all other methods (99% AUC; * * * : P < O.0O1, Bonferroni-Corrected) BClassification performance under increasing amount of noise. TRAKR performance declines grad-ually with noise intensity, while MLP performance degrades abruptly at higher noise levels. Chancelevel is at 10%.
Figure 4: A) Neural task design (see subsubsection 2.5.1 for detailed description). B) Exampleneural time series from a single trial, with three behaviorally relevant epochs (rest, choice and in-strumental reward seeking period). C) MLP: Multi-layer perceptron (as in Fawaz et al. (2019));ESN: echo-state network (twiESN, as in Fawaz et al. (2019)); NB: Naive Bayes; DTW: DynamicTime Warping (as in Rakthanmanon et al. (2012)); MI: Mutual Information; Euc: Euclidean distancemetric. TRAKR performs on par with MLP, while outperforming all other methods in classifyingthe different neural epochs (*** : p < 0.001, Bonferroni-Corrected; chance-level at 33%). D) Allmethods perform at chance-level (50% AUC) in distinguishing match/mismatch trials, suggestingthat the OFC does not encode enough information to distinguish between the two conditions. E)Classification performance (TRAKR) decreases over 11 recording sessions (35 days).
