Figure 1: Architecture diagram of differentiable nonparametric belief propagation. DNBP combines domainknowledge in the form of graphical models with differentiable neural networks for tractable inference in con-tinuous spaces. Input features from a deep neural network and the probabilistic relationships encoded in agraphical model are learnedjointly in an end-to-end fashion using backpropagation. Following offline training,DNBP can be applied to unseen data without hand-tuning.
Figure 2: a) Geometry and example configuration of the double pendulum. b) Graphical model used by DNBPfor the double pendulum task. c) Geometry and an example configuration of the spider structure. d) Graphicalmodel used by DNBP for the spider task.
Figure 3: Average error of DNBP and LSTMpredictions as a function of clutter ratio andkeypoint type for double pendulum tracking.
Figure 4: Average error of DNBP and LSTMpredictions as a function of clutter ratio for ar-ticulated ’spider' tracking.
Figure 5: Tracking of double pendulum byDNBP under partial occlusion (orange block).
Figure 6: Comparison of articulated 'spider'tracking by LSTM (d,e,f) and DNBP (g,h,i) un-der cluttered conditions. Predicted and groundtruth keypoints shown as yellow circles. Cluttershown as faded shapes for illustration to high-light predictions.
Figure 8: Quantitative comparison between DNBP and neural network baseline on hand pose tracking taskof the FPHAB dataset. For each model the percent of frames with predicted pose less than a set threshold iscalculated as the threshold is varied from 0mm to 80mm.
Figure 9: Inspection of learned PairWiSe potentials from double pendulum tracking.
Figure 10: Inspection of DNBP's learned pairwise potentials from spider tracking. Only two of the six areshoWn to avoid redundancy, remaining four shoW very similar output.
Figure 11: Output from DNBP on randomly sampled frames of the hand Pose tracking experiment. Visualizedmodel uncertainty is calculated from the marginal belief estimates of DNBP as 1 standard deviation in the Xand y dimensions respectively as calculated by estimated covariance of belief particles. Uncertainty in depthdimension is not visualized.
