Figure 1: Visualization of cut flow imbalance and meta-graph: (a) 75% of edges flow from Transientto Sink, while 25% of edges flow in the opposite direction; (b) top pair imbalanced flow on Migrationdata (Perry, 2003): most edges flow from red (1) to blue (2); (c) & (d) are for a Directed StochasticBlock Model with a cycle meta-graph with ambient nodes, for a total of 5 clusters. 75% of the edgesflow in direction 0 → 1 → 2 → 3 → 0, while 25% flow in the opposite direction. Cluster 4 is theambient cluster. In (c), dashed lines indicate flows with random equally likely directions; these flowsdo not exist in the meta-graph adjacency matrix F. For (d), the lighter the color, the stronger the flow.
Figure 2: DIGRAC overview: from feature matrix XV and adjacency matrix A, we first computethe row-normalized adjacency matrices AS and At. Then, we apply two separate MLPS on XV, toobtain hidden representations Hs and Ht. Next, we compute their decoupled embeddings usingEq. (4), and its equivalent for target embeddings. The concatenated decoupled embeddings are thefinal embeddings. For node clustering tasks, we add a linear layer followed by a unit softmax toobtain the probability matrix P. Applying argmax on each row of P yields node cluster assignments.
Figure 3: Hyperparemter analysis (a) and ablation study (b-d) on a “cycle" DSBM with n = 1000nodes, K = 5 clusters, ρ = 1, and p = 0.02, without ambient nodes.
Figure 4: Test ARI comparison on synthetic data. Dashed lines highlight DIGRAC’s performance.
Figure 5: ARI comparison of loss functions on DSBM with 1000 nodes, 5 blocks, ρ = 1,p = 0.02without ambient nodes, of cycle (left) and complete (right) meta-graph structures, respectively. Thefirst component of the legend is the choice of pairwise imbalance, and the second component is thevariant of selecting pairs. The naming conventions for the abbreviations in the legend are provided inTable 2.
Figure 6: Imbalance scores comparison of loss functions on DSBM with 1000 nodes, 5 blocks,ρ = 1,p = 0.02 without ambient nodes, of the complete meta-graph structure. The legend is thesame as Figure 5(a).
Figure 7: Imbalance scores comparison of loss functions on DSBM with 1000 nodes, 5 blocks,ρ = 1,p = 0.02 without ambient nodes, of the cyclic meta-graph structure. The legend is the sameas Figure 5(a).
Figure 8:	Hyperparameter analysis on different hyperparameter settings on the complete DSBM With1000 nodes, 5 clusters, ρ = 1, andp = 0.02 without ambient nodes.
Figure 9:	Hyperparameter analysis on different hyperparameter settings on the complete DSBM With1000 nodes, 5 clusters, ρ = 1, andp = 0.02 with ambient nodes.
Figure 10:	Hyperparameter analysis on different hyperparameter settings on the cycle DSBM with1000 nodes, 5 clusters, ρ = 1, andp = 0.02 with ambient nodes.
Figure 11: Node clustering test ARI comparison on four additional synthetic data sets. Dashed lineshighlight DIGRAC’s performance. Error bars are given by one standard error. Abbreviations for allthe methods are given in Section 4 in the main text.
Figure 12: Ranked pairs of pairwise imbalance recovered by comparing methods for different choicesof normalization on the Telegram data set. Lines are used to highlight DIGRAC’s performance.
Figure 13: Ranked pairs of pairwise imbalance recovered by comparing methods for different choicesof normalization on the Migration data set. Lines are used to highlight DIGRAC’s performance.
Figure 14: Ranked pairs of pairwise imbalance recovered by comparing methods for different choicesof normalization on WikiTalk data set. Lines are used to highlight DIGRAC's performance. InfoMaPresults are omitted here because it triggers memory error due to the large number of predicted clusters.
Figure 15:	Ranked pairs of pairwise imbalance recovered by comparing methods for different choicesof normalization on Lead-Lag data set. Lines are used to highlight DIGRAC’s performance. InfoMapresults are omitted here because it only predicts a single cluster.
Figure 16:	Predicted meta-graph flow matrix from DIGRAC of five real-world data sets.
Figure 17: US migration predicted clusters, along with the geographic locations of the counties aswell as state boundaries (in black). InfoMap results are omitted here because it only produces onehuge cluster. The input data is normalized, following Eq. (13).
Figure 18: US migration predicted cluster pairs with top imbalance, along with the geographiclocations of the counties as well as state boundaries (in black). Red (label 1) is the sending clusterwhile blue (label 2) is the receiving cluster. Yellow (label 0) denotes all the other locations beingconsidered. Subcaptions show the imbalance score and the rank based on that score.
Figure 19: US migration predicted clusters, along with the geographic locations of the counties aswell as state boundaries (in black). The input digraph has extremely large entries; unlike in Figure17, we do not employ here the normalization given by Eq. (13). Altogether, this demonstrates therobustness of DIGRAC to outliers in the data, which is not a characteristic of other state-of-the-artmethods such as Herm and Herm_rw.
