Figure 1: Aspirin C9H8O4, its 3-cluster partition and the corresponding coarsen graphin which the bottom level is the highest resolution (e.g., G itself) while the top level is the lowestresolution (e.g., G is coarsened into a single node).
Figure 2: Hierarchy of 3-level Multiresolution Graph Network on Aspirin molecular graphOptionally, the global decoder dg?bai makes sure that the whole set of node latents Z ⑹ is able tocapture the inter-connection between clusters.
Figure 3: MGVAE generates molecules on QM9 (4 on the left) and ZINC (the rest) equivariantly.
Figure 4: Some generated examples on QM9 by the all-at-once MGVAE with second order Sn-equivariant decoders.
Figure 5: Some generated examples on QM9 by the all-at-once MGVAE with a MLP decoderinstead of the second order Sn-equivariant one. It generates more tree-like structures.
Figure 6: Some generated examples on QM9 by the autoregressive MGN.
Figure 7: Some generated examples on ZINC by the all-at-once MGVAE with second order Sn -equivariant decoders. In addition of graph features such as one-hot atomic types, we include severalchemical features computed from RDKit (as in Table 7) as the input for the encoders. A generatedexample can contain more than one connected components, each of them is a valid molecule.
Figure 8: Some generated molecules on ZINC by the autoregressive MGN with high QED (drug-likeness score).
Figure 9: Interpolation on the latent space: we randomly select two molecules from ZINC and wereconstruct the corresponding molecular graphs on the interpolation line between the two latents.
Figure 10: The top row includes generated examples and the bottom row includes training exampleson the synthetic 2-community dataset.
Figure 11: EGO-SMALL.
Figure 12: An image of digit 8 from MNIST (left) and its grid graph representation at 16 × 16resolution level (right).
Figure 13: An example of reconstruction on each resolution level for a test image in MNIST.
Figure 14: Generated examples at the highest 32 X 32 resolution level.
Figure 15: Generated examples at the 16 × 16 resolution level.
