Figure 1: Illustration of genetic algorithm process for constrained optimizationThe algorithm starts by constructing a population depending on whether the target molecule orsimilar molecules exist in the dataset. In the case of the target molecule or its similar moleculeexisting in the dataset, the population consists of molecules above the similarity calculated by thesimilarity between the molecules in the dataset and the target molecule. On the contrary, a targetmolecular SMILES is randomly arranged to construct a population according to the population size.
Figure 2: Illustration of genetic operations. A-1) Operators of crossover A-2) Operation of crossoverB-1) SMILES to SELFIES transformation and mutation restriction sites(terminal 10%) B-2) Opera-tors of mutation5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20224	Experiments4.1	Data setThe experiments used 250,000 commercially available molecules extracted from ZINC (Irwin et al.,2012). LogP, SAScore, and RingP enalty constituting J(m) for the molecule m are normalizedbased on the corresponding data set. The optimization target is 800 molecules with the lowest pe-nalized logP value in the data set.
Figure 3: Distribution of penalized LogPFigure 3 shows the distribution of how much penalized LogP has improved compared to the originalmolecules. The penalized LogP of molecules was maximized, and the distribution shifted from rightto left. In the case of the δ ≥ 0.4, it can be seen that the distribution of penalized LogP is more6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022skewed to the right than δ ≥ 0.6 because the structural restriction is lower. In Figure 4, moleculeswith maximized penalized LogP were visualized while maintaining structural constraints.
Figure 4: Compounds generated at the twentieth iteration (left : δ ≥ 0.4 / right : δ ≥ 0.6)OriginalPlogP = 3.523	PlogP = -7.374PlogP=I.524	Y PlOgP =-8.371PlogP = 0.865	PlogP = -5.066We focused on cannabidiol molecules which are expected to have promise for targeting variousdisease proteins. Cannabidiol is a natural product extracted from cannabis and is a non-psychoactiveingredient. This is attracting attention as a promising molecule that can improve Alzheimer’s diseasesymptoms by reducing beta-amyloid accumulation and amyloid plaque prodcution, which affectsthe pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (Cooray et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021). We experimentedwith penalized LogP molecular optimization of cannabidiol. The Tanimoto similarity coefficient isset to 0.6, and optimization is carried out up to the 19th generation. The Murcko Scaffold (Bemis& Murcko, 1996) of the cannabidiol molecule is compared with the generated molecules. Duplicatemolecules are removed and a total of 11 molecules are compared. The visualization result is shown infigure 5. In this figure, the yellow site is a molecular scaffold and the red sites are the altered pointsin the target molecule. Although some generations do not retain the scaffold, it can be seen thatmost of the generated molecules do retain the scaffold. Moreover, the scaffolds of all the generatingmolecules contain cannabidiol scaffolds as substructures. Furthermore, Hydrophobic carbon-valentfunctional groups were mainly added which can improve the penalized LogP value.
Figure 5: Optimization of Penalized LogP for Synthetic Cannabidiol(δ ≥ 0.6)7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20225	ConclusionIn molecular inverse design, the computational method of genetic algorithms is effective in exploringvast chemical spaces. A common molecular design strategy is to narrow the chemical search space,starting with known potential molecules. In lead optimization process, the scaffold, the ”core” ofthe molecule, is intentionally maintained to preserve basic bioactivity. This process of optimizingSAR(Structure-Activity Relationship) properties is a multi-objective problem that maintains chem-ical space associated with the privileged scaffold.
