Figure 1: Conceptual experiments: (a) Illustration of Shortcut-CIFAR100 and CIFAR99. OnShortcut-CIFAR100, all the samples of “apples” are modified, including training and testing sam-ples. On CIFAR99, all the testing samples except for samples of “apples” are modified. (b) Classactivation mapping (CAM) visualizations of models trained on Shortcut-CIFAR100 on samples withsynthetic shortcuts. While other models fixate on added blocks, WP(be short for White Paper As-sistance) successfully alleviates the excessive reliance of the model on shortcuts and help it capturemore informative features. We provide more visualizations in Appendix. A.1.
Figure 2: Effects of different types ofimages used in our scheme. The whitepaper outperforms the other solutions.
Figure 3: Behavior of White Paper Assistance: (a, b) The evolution of training/testing accuracywhen training ResNet-110 with and without WP. (c) Changes in parameters of real images trainingand white paper training. We use L1 distance to measure the changes of parameters on the finalconvolutional layer of ResNet-110 when training WP with P = 1. (d) Parameter distributions beforeand after White Paper Assistance was conducted. This change happened on the final convolutionallayer of ResNet-110 at epoch 100. More results of changes or distributions on other layers arepresent in Appendix.D.
Figure 4: Illustration of how we determine which part is more affected by WP. We also extend thisexperiment to other models in Appendix.D.
Figure 5: Supplementary cam visualizations on models trained on Shortcut-CIFAR100.
Figure 6: Final test accuracy as a function of iterations that we repeat the process for. The shadedareas represent the minimum and maximum results from 4 runs. Dashed dotted line denotes thebaseline accuracy. Our approach receives near optimal performances when the amounts of trainingon white paper and real images are close to each other(In this case, the times of iteration of realimage training for one epoch are 391).
Figure 7:	Behavior of White Paper Assistance on other convolutional layer (a,b) Changes in pa-rameters of real images training and white paper training on other convolutional layers. The shadedareas indicate the standard deviations across 4 independent trails. (c,d) Parameter distributions be-fore and after White Paper Assistance conducted on other convolutional layers of ResNet-110 atepoch 100.
Figure 8:	Number of training examples per class in Long-tailed CIFAR-100.
Figure 9:	Effects of Probability P and Strength λ.
