Figure 1: Facial images from the UTKFace dataset to show the variation with age. X-ray imageswith different levels of brightness created from the RSNA Bone Age dataset.
Figure 2: Comparison of well-known distance-based and confidence-based OOD detection methodsfor the CE model on our benchmark datasets. Age ’26’, year ’2005’, and brightness ’1.0’ are in-distribution data in UTKFace, Amazon Review, and RSNA Bone Age dataset, respectively. TheNAtS detection performance of these methods is inconsistent across different datasets.
Figure 3: PCA visualization to demonstrate the movement of NAtS samples as we vary the age, yearand brightness in UTKFace, Amazon Review and RSNA Bone Age dataset respectively.
Figure 4: Impact on prediction confidence on varying age, year, and brightness in UTKFace, Ama-zon Review, and RSNA Bone Age dataset, respectively.
Figure 5: ID score landscape (brighter region means higher ID score) of the existing OOD detection methods(left: MSP, middle: ODIN, right: Mahalanobis). We use a synthetic 2D dataset to train a 4-layer ResNet. TheRed points represent the ID samples; Purple Stars, Gray Diamonds and Orange Triangles indicate samplesfrom different NAtS categories. A sample is regarded as NAtS when it has a low ID score.
Figure 6: The density plot of sequence length per year. The x-axis represents the length with logscaling.
Figure 7: The density plot of the ratio of important words per sequence.
Figure 8: PCA visualization to demonstrate the movement of NAtS samples after training modelswith our proposed loss. We vary the age, year and brightness in UTKFace, Amazon Review andRSNA Bone Age dataset respectively.
Figure 9: PCA visualization to demonstrate the movement of NAtS samples as we vary the age, yearand brightness in UTKFace, Amazon Review and RSNA Bone Age dataset respectively.
Figure 10: NAtS detection performance on distributional shifts in three datasets measured by AU-ROC.
Figure 11: Visualization of synthetic datasetwith 8 distinct classes. Each class label isdefined by using the first two dimensions ofeach sample.
Figure 12: ID score landscape (brighter region means higher ID score) of the existing OOD detectionmethods in multi-class classification task. We use a synthetic 2D dataset with 8 distinct classes.
