Figure 1: Figure 1a shows a histogram of the F1 scores that resulted from applying the methods tothe different synthetic datasets 5 times (with the best performing contamination level for each modelshown). Here, the maximum F1 score for each dataset is plotted for both the recurrent based methodsand the non-recurrent based methods. Figure 1b shows the number of times a particular algorithmproduced the best F1 score on a synthetic dataset. Auto-Endoer, GBRT, Transformer Encoder andTransformer Encoder-Decoder never showed the best performance on a dataset.
Figure 3: Figure 3a shows the average F1 scores of each model over 5 runs for the best performingcontamination level on the Movement data. Figure 3b shows the ROC curve for these experimentsin which the average F1 score was highest over the contamination levels.
Figure 2: Figure 2a shows the average F1 score of the best performing contamination level fordifferent methods when applied to the Water Quality dataset. Figure 2b shows the average F1 scoreof the best performing contamination level for the different methods when applied to the SWAN-SFdataset. Both of these datasets were discussed in Section 2.1.
Figure 4: Figure 4a Shows a histogram of the values of the area under the ROC curve for each ofthe best performing recurrent and non-recurrent methods on the separated Movement data. Figure4b shows the number of times each model obtained the best F1 score when applied to the separatedMovement data. For both figures, each data point represents a result on a household’s data.
Figure 5:	Figure 5a shows the contamination of the synthetic data, the real-world data and theMovement data. Figure 5b shows the proportion of point outliers that are in each of these datasets.
Figure 6: Box plot showing the distributions of values in the Movement data after processing. Figure6a shows the distribution of the whole dataset, whereas Figure 6b shows the distribution split by theirlabel.
Figure 7: This shows the average frequencies of visits to each location over the entire cohort, sepa-rated by time.
Figure 8: Self-Attention Encoder-Decoder outlier detection architecture.
