Figure 1: How to define the in-distribution? (a) Traditional out-of-distribution detection studieshave managed the in-distribution in an entangled view. However, this assumption could be naiveconsidering the complex nature of the real environment. (b) We decompose the definition of the in-distribution to the texture and semantic aspects. This provides the flexibility to handle complicatedscenarios by determining which definition of the in-distribution is suitable for a given scenario.
Figure 2: Model overview. Our framework first extracts the texture and semantic information withthe corresponding modules, and then combines them via the normalizing flow-based method. (a)Texture feature T (x) is distilled by the Fourier spectrum-based component. (b) We use a multi-SVDD method with a novel angular initialization to extract the semantic information S(x). (c) Out-put features are merged by the explicit probability inference method, RealNVP. Here, we introducethe user control parameter λ to determine which feature is more suitable for a given OOD scenario.
Figure 3: Comparison on the initialization strategy in multi-SVDD. (a) The model with K-meansinitialization is effective for the anomaly detection but not for the OOD detection scenario. This isbecause the definition of the anomaly is the samples that do not belong to the cluster regions (darkshade), while the definition of the OOD is the samples that does not lie in the in-distribution manifold(light shade). (b) Our proposed angular distance-based initialization guides the initial center vectorsto be positioned following a (virtual) circular line. As a result, it prevents the OOD samples fromnot belonging to the in-distribution by creating tight cluster layouts without a hole.
Figure 4: Power spectrum density analysis.
Figure 5: Comparison of the benchmark scenarios. (a, b) Out-of-distribution detection scenario.
Figure 6: Example of the datasets used in our proposed benchmark. (a) Corrupted CIFAR-10dataset to evaluate the robustness on the texture discrepant in-distribution case (Section 4.2.1). (b)MNIST variants datasets for the semantic discrepancy scenario (Section 4.2.2).
