Figure 1: Comparison between target functions and point sampling densities for 1a the camel func-tion, 1b the sinusoidal function, 1c the slashed circle function. Supplementary fig. 7 shows howpoints are mapped from latent to target space.
Figure 2: Benchmarking ZuNIS against uniform sampling and VEGAS with default settings. In(2a-2b), we show the sampling speed-up (ratio of integrand variance) as a function of the relativestandard deviation of the integrand, while we show the unweighting speed-up (ratio of unweightingefficiencies) in (2c-2d).
Figure 3:	Comparison of the training and sampling speed of ZüNI S and VEGAS. As can be ex-pected, ZüNI S is much slower than VEGAS, both for training and sampling, although larger batchsizes can better leverage the power of hardware accelerators.
Figure 4:	Figure 4a: Effect of repeatedly training on the same sample of points over multiple epochs.
Figure 5: Sample Feynman Diagrams for e-μ → e-μ via Z, dd → dd via Z and Uc → Ucg .
Figure 6: Average performance of ZuNIS over 20 runs relative to VEGAS, measured by the relativespeed-up in fig. 6a and by the relative unweighting efficiency in fig. 6b.
Figure 7: Mapping between the uniform point density in the latent space and the target distributionfor the camel function, the sinusoidal function, the slashed circle function. Points are colored basedon their position in latent space.
Figure 8: Average performance of ZüNIS over 20 runs relative to flat sampling, measured by therelative speed-up in 8a and by the relative unweighting efficiency in 8b.
Figure 9: Median of the performance of ZuNIS over 20 runs relative to VEGAS for the processe-μ → e-μ via Z depending on the loss function, the survey strategy and number of epochs,measured by the relative speed-up in 9a and by the relative unweighting efficiency in 9b.
Figure 10: Median of the performance of ZüNIS over 20 runs relative to VEGAS for the processdd → dd via Z depending on the loss function, the survey strategy and number of epochs, measuredby the relative speed-up in 10a and by the relative unweighting efficiency in 10b.
Figure 11: Median of the performance of ZUNIS over 20 runs relative to VEGAS for the processuc → ucg depending on the loss function, the survey strategy and number of epochs, measured bythe relative speed-up in 11a and by the relative unweighting efficiency in 11b.
