Figure 1: Illustration of how our method (c) approximates a 1D multimodal distribution p(z) com-pared to a randomization-based mode picking (a), and naive diversity training (b). Blue shows thetrue distribution and red - approximations. This figure can be reproduced using the provided sourcecode.
Figure 2: Uncertainty of an ensemble of two layer neural networks on a two moons dataset (sizeM = 11). Compared to DE, which is uncertain only close to the decision boundary, our methodyields the desired behavior - the further We move from training data, the higher uncertainty is. Suchbehavior is controlled by the diversity regularization coefficient λM .
Figure 3: Out-of distribution detection results on CIFAR 100 for 3 different architectures (readcolumn-wise). Here, we show AUC values from 0.5 to 1 averaged across 5 seeds.
Figure 4: OOD detection examples. In subplot (a), the top row shows true positives, and the bottom -true negatives detected by our method. We also show the uncertainty values. Subplot (b) shows thefailures of both DE and our method on positives (top row) and negatives (bottom row), respectively.
Figure C1: Relationship between accuracy, ACE, and Xm (M = 11). Subplots (a) and (b) show theresults for CIFAR10. Subplots (c) and (d) show the results for CIFAR100.
Figure C2: Relationship be-tween accuracy, negative log-likelihood, ACE, and XM fordifferent M on MNIST (Le-Cun et al., 1998). Subplots(a) and (b) show the resultsfor PreResNet8. Experimentswere re-run 3 times with differ-ent seeds. We found that thebest results were obtained withXM = 0.1.
Figure C3: CIFAR10 Robustness benchmark results (M = 11) (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019).
Figure C4: Uncertainty estimation quality on PreResNet164 (He et al., 2016) trained on CIFAR100and evaluated on CIFAR100 test set vs LSUN and SVHN, respectively. Histograms (a) and (e)indicate Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Histograms (b) and (f) show our methodtrained with λM = 5. Subplots (c) and (d) show the ROC and PR curves for the LSUN dataset,respectively. Subplots (g) and (h) show the ROC and PR curves for the SVHN dataset, respectivelyThe curves were computed using average epistemic uncertainty per sample (5 seeds). Standard errorswere < 0.01.
