Figure 1: Product of the Frobenius norm in the experiments on CIFAR-10. The red lines are the resultsof standard training. The blue lines are the results of adversarial training. (a): Standard Generalizationgap, the blue line represents E (fadv) and the red line represents E(fstd). (b): Robust GeneralizationGap, the blue line represents E(fadv) and the red line represents E(fstd) (c): Qd=IIlWl IlF of theneural networks. (d): Qd=ι IlWlllF/γ of the neural networks, the blue line represents Wadv and thered line represents Wstd .
Figure 2: Product of the Frobenius norm in the experiments on VGG networks. The red lines arethe results of standard training. The blue lines are the results of adversarial training. The first roware the experiments on VGG-11. The second row are the experiments on VGG-13. (a) and (e):Generalization gap. (b) and (f): Margin γ over training set. (c) and (g): Qld=1 ∣Wl ∣F of the neuralnetworks. (d) and (h): Qd=ι IlWl IlF/γ of the neural networks.
Figure 3: Product of the Frobenius norm in the experiments on CIFAR-10. The red lines are theresults of standard training. The blue lines are the results of adversarial training. The first row isthe experiments on VGG-16. The second row is the experiments on VGG-19. (a) and (e): StandardGeneralization gap. (b) and (f): Robust Generalization Gap. (c) and (g): Qld=1 kWl kF of the neuralnetworks. (d) and (h): Qd=ι IlWl IlF/γ of the neural networks.
Figure 4: Product of the ∣∣ ∙ ∣∣ι,∞-Norm in the experiments on CIFAR-10. The red lines are theresults of standard training. The blue lines are the results of adversarial training. (a) Qld=1 kWl k1,∞of VGG-16networks. (b) Qd=ι IlWl∣∣ι,∞∕γ of VGG-16networks. (c) Qd=ι IlWlllι,∞ of VGG-19networks. (d) Qd=IIlWll∣ι,∞∕γ of VGG-19 networks.
Figure 5: Ablation study of margins. The first to the 4th rows are the experiments on VGG-11, 13,16, and 19, respectively.
Figure 6: Product of the Frobenius norm in the experiments on VGG networks on CIFAR-100. Thered lines are the results of standard training. The blue lines are the results of adversarial training.
Figure 7: Experiments on the effects of weight decay. (a) Robust generalization gap with or withoutweight decay on VGG-16. (b) Frobenius norm with or without weight decay on VGG-16. (c) Robustgeneralization gap with or without weight decay on VGG-19. (d) Frobenius norm with or withoutweight decay on VGG-19.
