Figure 1: Example of PDE term selection inconsistency using the Lasso - from a noiseless library ofa two-soliton analytical solution of the Korteweg-de-Vries (KdV) equation: ut = -6uux - uxxx. In(a) the terms ux and uux are highly correlated. In (b) no matter the regularisation, the Lasso selectsthe spurious term ux . On the right hand side, with a proper choice of λ, the adaptive Lasso mightselect the true model.
Figure 2: Example of projec-tion that lies outside the unitsphere: the IRC is violated.
Figure 3: Randomising the adaptive Lasso to perform model selection under violated IRC. Thelibrary comes from Rudy et al. (2017), and was obtained by polynomial interpolation and numericaldifferentiation from a numerical solution of the Kuramoto-Sivashinksy equation (ut = -uux -uxx - uxxxx) with additional 1% Gaussian white noise. Even Θ violates the IRC: ∆(Θ, T) = 1.77.
Figure 4: With and without rAdaLasso within DeepMod. In (a), all true underlying equations arerecovered when using the proposed rAdaLasso within DeepMod , from n = 2k samples for varyingα% Gaussian white noise levels. The original DeepMod leverages a thresholded LassoCV sparsityestimator which selects spurious terms (except for the KdV example) and results in poorly general-isable PDEs (the MSE on the test set increases). In (b), the stability plots show the selected termsfor all the examples have become independent (after DeepMod has converged) from the hyperpa-rameters πthr and EVmax .
Figure 5: Comparing PDE-STRIDE and the randomised adaptive Lasso selection performance on achallenging case: recovering the Burgers’ equation from a library built using polynomial interpola-tion from a dataset with 4% noise Maddu et al. (2019). In (a), PDE-STRIDE solves a relaxation ofthe best subset selection (l0 regularisation) using an Iterative Hard Thresholding algorithm. In (b),the stability plot for the randomised adaptive Lasso. The true underlying PDE can be recovered byboth methods by a proper tuning of the error selection: EVmax = 2. However, the computationalcost to run PDE-STRIDE is a couple orders of magnitude higher (≈ 122s) compared to the one offor the randomised adaptive Lasso (≈ 1.30s).
Figure 6: DeepMod interpolations for the experiments described in the main text.
