Figure 1: Example of the Haar MRA: (a) Dilated translation of the Haar scaling map 夕 = I[0,1).
Figure 2: (a) Decomposing approximation coefficients at level j + 1 into approximation and detailcoefficients at level j. Here h and g are defined by hk := h-k and gk := g-k, respectively, * isthe two-sided discrete convolution and ] downsamples a sequence by discarding all terms with oddindex. (b) Reconstructing approximation coefficients at level j + 1 from the approximation anddetail coefficients at level j. Here ↑ samples a sequence up by putting zeros in between every term.
Figure 3: The cut-off signal γ*(t) = γ(lt)1[-ι,i] (t) depicted in blue. We only compute approxima-tion coefficients associated to the region [一2, 2].
Figure 4: A schematic picture of our network. Here a “residual block” corresponds to a standardresidual convolutional layer. The first residual conv-block uses 32 filters and is doubled after everytwo residual conv-blocks. Each green block corresponds to the operation depicted in Figure 2b. Inthe decoder, we only predict detail coefficients up to level j1 . No detail coefficients are used at levelsj1 + 1 ≤ j ≤ j2 . In this example, we have set j1 = j0 + 2 and j2 = j0 + 3. In reality, the decoderconsists of two upsampling paths, one for each spatial component of the curve. We have only drawnone for notational convenience. During training, only the approximation coefficients at the lowestand highest resolution levels (most right curves in blue) are supervised.
Figure 5: Predicted and observed boundaries colored in red and orange, respectively, for the spleenand prostate for the best models (db8). The last two columns correspond to “hard” examples. Pre-dictions for the other wavelet bases, as well as the toy-example, can be found in Appendix D.
Figure 6: Boxplots and visualization of approximate densities for the dice scores and Hausdorffdistances for the toy problem.
Figure 7: Predicted curve (in red) for a binary mask (in white). In order to visualize the predictedcurve without too much clutter we have not depicted the ground-truth contour.
Figure 8: Predicted and observed wavelet decompositions of the first component of the contourdepicted in the fourth column in Figure 7.
Figure 9: Boxplots and visualization of approximate densities for the dice scores and Hausdorffdistances for the spleen.
Figure 10: Predicted and observed boundaries colored in red and orange, respectively, of the spleen.
Figure 11: Predicted and observed wavelet decompositions of the first component of the contourdepicted in the first column in Figure 10. For db4 and db8 the detail coefficients on higher resolutionlevels are too small to be accurately predicted, but have little impact on the accuracy of the finalapproximation.
Figure 12: Boxplots and visualization of approximate densities for the dice scores and Hausdorffdistances for the prostate.
Figure 13: Predicted and observed boundaries colored in red and orange, respectively, of theprostate. The last two columns correspond to “hard” examples.
Figure 14: Predicted and observed wavelet decompositions of the first component of the hard exam-ples depicted in (a), (b) the fifth column and (c), (d) the sixth column of Figure 13.
