Figure 1: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=8) of Equation (3) obtained by max-imizing MSJD (a) and optimizing Ab Initio objective (b). Each subplot illustrates the proposaldistribution’s density when sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 2: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=8) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingL2HMC’s objective. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s density when sampling froma given starting position (in red).
Figure 3: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=8) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.3. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s densitywhen sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 4: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=8) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.6. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s densitywhen sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 5: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=8) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.9. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s densitywhen sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 6: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingour Ab Initio objective. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s density when samplingfrom a given starting position (in red).
Figure 7: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by maximiz-ing MSJD. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s density when sampling from a givenstarting position (in red).
Figure 8: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingL2HMC’s objective. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s density when sampling froma given starting position (in red).
Figure 9: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.3. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’s densitywhen sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 10: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by opti-mizing GSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.6. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’sdensity when sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 11: Comparison of multi-scheme mixture proposals (L=3) of Equation 4 obtained by opti-mizing GSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.9. Each subplot illustrates the proposal distribution’sdensity when sampling from a given starting position (in red).
Figure 12: Location of the optimum of MSJD when optimizing the multi-scheme architecture ofEquation 3.
Figure 13: Locations of the optima of the GSM when optimizing the multis-scheme architecture ofEquation 3 with 8 coupling layers targeting acceptance rates of (a) 60% and (b) 30%.Orange linesrepresent the restrictions of the model classes that attain the desired acceptance rates.
Figure 14: Locations of the optima of the GSM when optimizing the multi-scheme architecture ofEquation 3 with 3 coupling layers targeting acceptance rates of (a) 60% and (b) 30%. Orange linesrepresent the restrictions of the model classes that attain the desired acceptance rates.
Figure 15: Comparison of maximal MCMC efficiency (L*) attained given a target acceptance rate inthe neighborhood of accepance rate X . Model A exhibits continuous behaviour, as we might expectfrom restricted architectures like preconditioned RWM. Model B exhibits discontinuous behaviour,as exhibited by the multi-scheme architecture with 3 coupling layers around an acceptance rate of55-56%.
Figure 16: Location of the optimum of an Ab Initio objective when optimizing the multi-schemearchitecture of Equation 3.
Figure 17: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingEquation (2). Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component (in red) alongside adensity plot of the probability of sampling from that component based on starting position.
Figure 18: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingMSJD. Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component (in red) alongside a densityplot of the probability of sampling from that component based on starting position.
Figure 19: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingL2HMC’s objective. Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component (in red) alongsidea density plot of the probability of sampling from that component based on starting position.
Figure 20: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.3. Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component(in red) alongside a density plot of the probability of sampling from that component based on startingposition.
Figure 21: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.6. Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component(in red) alongside a density plot of the probability of sampling from that component based on startingposition.
Figure 22: Comparison of position-dependent mixture proposals of Equation 3 obtained by optimizingGSM targeting an acceptance rate of 0.9. Each subplot illustrates the contours of a proposal component(in red) alongside a density plot of the probability of sampling from that component based on startingposition.
