Figure 1: TESSERACT’s architecture where c out of m clients may be malicious andsend carefully crafted values of their local models to throw the global model offconvergence. TESSERACT weights the gradients, received from the clients, by theirreputation scores before aggregation, (see varying and thicknesses of arrows from theclients.)our intuition and correspondingly the defense TESSERACT also holds for other attacks, e.g., thetargeted and untargeted label flipping attacks (Appendix § A.3). However, the other attacks are lessdamaging, consistent with the observation in Fang et al. (2020). Thus, in the main paper, we focus onthe directed deviation model poisoning attack.
Figure 2: The average flip-score of malicious and benign clients over time for a motivating experiment wherea DNN is trained on MNIST for 500 iterations (80 benign, 20 malicious clients). In (a), only benign updateswere aggregated using FEDSGD, and in (b), only malicious updates were aggregated, depicting the twoextreme cases of federated learning in a malicious setting. These results show that when the global modelupdate is benign, the malicious clients send gradients with high flip-scores to deviate the model fromconvergence. However, when the global model update itself was poisoned, the benign clients send highflip-score gradients for recovery whereas the malicious clients maintain the direction of the already-poisonedmodel. Thus the intuition is too high flip-scores and too low flip-scores in a coordinated manner are red flags.
Figure 3: Left shows the test loss curve comparing TESSERACT with the benchmark aggregation algorithmsagainst the Full-Krum attack. We see that the attack generates sporadic spikes in training, best handled byTesseract, evident from its smooth test loss curve. Right shows the comparison of FABA and Tesseractacross diverse datasets for c/m = 0.3. FABA begins to fail with a higher fraction of malicious clients, whileTesseract remains robust.
Figure 4: Clients’ reputation weights againsttime with TESSERACT, with higher weights tobenign clients, as malicious ones tend to 0.
Figure 5: Performance of TESSERACT against adaptive white-box attacks, specifically designed to attackTesseract, evaluated on MNIST and CIFAR-10. We observe a significant improvement in test accuracy,compared to the base case impact of Full-Krum on Krum and Full-Trim on FedSGD, as reported in Table 2.
Figure 6: TESSERACT’s Performance against the targeted and untargeted label flipping attacks on theMNIST dataset. We observe that the attacks have some damage on the model, but Tesseract is able to remedythis for both attacks.
Figure 7: Figure (a) shows the performance of TESSERACT on MNIST with increasing c. We see thatTesseract is stable across a large range and breaks only above c = 0.45 which is close to the theoreticallimit of c = 0.5-. Figures (b) and (c) show the test accuracy of TESSERACT on MNIST dataset distributedwith varying non-IID bias across 100 clients in benign and malicious cases respectively. TESSERACT can beseen to be robust enough for a wide range of bias, 0.1-0.8, with a small dip in test accuracy occurring atbias = 0.9.
Figure 8: The figure shows the test accuracy ofTesseract when evaluated on MNIST dataset underthe default conditions with m = 100, c = 20 wherethe adversary launches the Weighted-Adaptive-Trimattack on the system, compared with the baselineFull-krum attack on GRU trained on Shakespeare5-6	250	500	750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000IterationFigure 9: The figure shows the impact of theFull-Krum attack on Krum aggregation on theShakespeare NLP dataset as compared to the otheraggregation techniques. It has a devastating impactperformance of FedSGD against the Full-Trim attack. which is mitigated by all defenses and most effectivelyTesseract successfully defends against this attack	by Tesseract as shown in Figure 3(a).
Figure 9: The figure shows the impact of theFull-Krum attack on Krum aggregation on theShakespeare NLP dataset as compared to the otheraggregation techniques. It has a devastating impactperformance of FedSGD against the Full-Trim attack. which is mitigated by all defenses and most effectivelyTesseract successfully defends against this attack	by Tesseract as shown in Figure 3(a).
