Figure 1: The Left Ventricle Ejection Time(LVET) is the duration between the beginning andend of the systolic phase. This interval corre-sponds to the opening and closing of the heart’saortic valve, during which the left ventricle ejectsblood into the system. In the PPG waveform, thisinterval begins at the diastolic point and ends withthe dicrotic notch.
Figure 2: Our multi-derivative architecture used for experimentation. Spatial features are extractedseparately for each set of derivative frames using 3D convolutional layers and mean pooling lay-ers. Once feature representations are extracted, the temporal features from each branch are con-catenated together and recurrent layers are used for modeling the temporal signals. The first- andsecond-derivative losses are calculated as the mean absolute error between the predictions and thesynchronized ground-truth PPG signal.
Figure 3: Comparison of true (black) and predicted (blue and green) raw or zeroth order (top), firstorder derivative (middle), and second order derivative (bottom) waveforms. The blue and greenlines reflect two models: predicting the first derivative (blue) and predicting the second derivative(green). Diastolic points are labeled with red dots, and dicrotic notches are labeled with blue dots.
Figure 4: Bland-Altman plots comparing error distributions for average task heart rate (left) andLVET intervals (right) for the model optimized for first-derivative prediction (blue) and the modeloptimized for second-derivative prediction (green). (left) The absolute difference between the trueand predicted heart rate for each subject/task. (right) The absolute difference between the predictedand true values (y-axis, in milliseconds) is plotted as a function of the true LVET (x-axis, in millisec-onds). The solid line represents the mean error, and the dotted lines represent the 95% confidenceintervals (± 1.96 × standard deviation).
Figure 5: Example video frames of different synthetic avatars generated for the training data set.
Figure 6: Example video frames from four participants in the AFRL dataset used for model testingand evaluation.
Figure 7: Comparison of Left Ventricle Ejection Time (LVET) estimation over a 5-minute timeperiod. Solid lines are computed as the mean LVET interval within non-overlapping 10-secondwindows.
