Figure 1: Basic outline of AuditAI. The training phase involves the design and training of the algorithms fora particular use case. The auditor lists a set of specifications that the trained model must satisfy. The auditorreceives the trained model from the designer and with the set of specifications has to determine whether themodel satisfies the specifications. If they are not satisfied, then the model is sent back to the designer for furtherupdates. After that, the model is deployed, with a model spec-sheet detailing the verified range of operation. Atdeployment, latent embeddings of the input inform whether the input is within model-specifications. Based onthe spec-sheet, it can be decided in which settings to use the model.
Figure 2: Instead of variations at the level of input (e.g. pixels),consider variations in the latent space. Given a specification, we usea variant of interval-bound propagation (IBP) to verify if the spec-ification is satisfied for -ball latent space variations for particularlatent dimensions.
Figure 3: Generated samples from latent space manip-ulation of features on the ImageNet, CheXpert, LSUNTower, and FFHQ datasets. We respectively show twoimages of a hen looking left and right, chest X-rayimages with and without pneumonia, towers with andwithout vegetation and faces, with and without glasses.
Figure 4: Amazon MTurk study involving 2000 humanevaluations for each value of in a study of CheXpertChest X-ray images. We showed pairs of real and gen-erated images to the MTurk workers who chose to takepart in our study and asked them to identify which imageis real and which is fake (generated). A value close to50% indicates that the MTurk workers were unable todistinguish the real images from the generated ones, in-dicating that the generated images looked as good as thereal images.
Figure 5: Each column shows images from a aprticular category that are presented in the HITs for the AmazonMTurk Experiment. For each HIT, we show pairs of images such that one image is from the real category andthe other image is a genertaed image from one of the other categories.
