Figure 1: An example of hypergraph and its equivalent weighted undirected graph (WC = (WC)>), whereqi(∙) = Qi(∙,e),i ∈ {1, 2}. Here, Qi = Q2 are both edge-dependent. The characteristics of the hypergraphare encoded in the weighted incidence matrices (i.e. vertex weights) Qi, Q2. WC := Q2D-1 Q> denotesthe edge-weight matrix of the clique graph and can be viewed as the embedding of high-order relationships.
Figure 2: Hypergraph RandomWalk. ① denotes the first stepand ② represents the second.
Figure 3: The division of Equivalencyproblem (undigraph). The blue box indi-cates condition (1) in Thm. 1 and red boxindicates condition (2). The dark blue partis still open yet.
Figure 4: An example of the disconnected hypergpraph and its equivalent weighted undirected graph. C is anisolated vertex. The characteristics of hypergraph are encoded in the weight incidence matrix Q. The elementsin WC := QD-1 Q> denotes the edge-weight matrix of the clique graph.
Figure 5: An example of hypergraph and its equivalent weighted directed graph, where qi(∙) = Qi(∙, e),i ∈{1, 2}. Here, Qi is edge-dependent and Q2 is edge-independent. The characteristics of the hypergraph areencoded in the weighted incidence matrices (i.e. vertex weights) Qi, Q2. WC := QiD-1 Q> denotes theedge-weight matrix of the clique graph and can be viewed as the embedding of high-order relationships.
Figure 6: An example of hypergraph and its equivalent weighted directed graph, where qi(∙) = Qi(∙, e),i ∈{1, 2}. Here, Qi is edge-independent and Q2 is edge-dependent. The characteristics of the hypergraph areencoded in the weighted incidence matrices (i.e. vertex weights) Qi, Q2. WC := QiD-1 Q> denotes theedge-weight matrix of the clique graph and can be viewed as the embedding of high-order relationships.
Figure 7: An expample of edge-dependent vertex weight matrix Q of protein.
Figure 8: Test accuracy by varying the hyper-parameters σ (left), β (middle) and α (right) of SHSC.
Figure 9: The edge-dependent vertex weights of NTU2012 dataset (MVCNN feature + MVCNN structure). Thefigure on the left represents the distance-based vertex weights matrix Q used in our GHCN and SHSC. Themiddle (Q1 ) and right (Q2) denote the node-level and edge-level attention coefficient matrix of HGAT (Dinget al., 2020), respectively.
