Figure 1: Hyperdyn Performancewhen the momentum term is set to 0. We observe that it outperforms manually tuned SGD withmomentum, which is a more sophisticated algorithm. This suggests that it is more important tofind good learning rates for a simple algorithm, rather than attempt to design a more sophisticatedalgorithm. Moreover, the wait and watch strategy of Hyperdyn is incorporating past information forstability, similar in principle to momentum. This could also explain why SGD tuned with Hyperdyncan outperform manually tuned SGD with momentum.
Figure 2: Dynamics of HyperdynComparison of Hyperdyn with Other Schemes: We compare Hyperdyn to a greedy versionof it, where we switch to the best performing hyperparameter in every epoch. This greedymethod, or epoch based Bayesian optimization, is obtained by setting the offset i.e., b = ∞in Check_Accuracy_Trend sub-routine; which is nothing but the standard Bayesian optimizationmethod with compositional kernel incorporating the temporal dependence. However, as Fig. 1(d)shows, the epoch based BO has poor generalization. We set the batch size of 1000 on ResNet-20. This observation necessitates the need for a “wait-and-watch” strategy, as realized by theCheck-Accuracy-Trend module. Although the epoch based BO version outperforms in the initialfew epochs, it plateaus quickly and is overtaken by Hyperdyn . The choice of batch size is arbitraryfor Figure 1(d) as this observation is consistent across different batch sizes. We also compare Hyper-dyn with a version of random search 5x, i.e., at every epoch we invest 5x resources more in randomsearch than in Hyperdyn . We find that random search is susceptible to higher variance than Hy-perdyn , especially at larger batch sizes. Figure 1(d) shows a typical comparison of random search5x and Hyperdyn . We employed a variant of Hyperband where we reduced the search space oflearning rate by 0.1 instead of successive halving and did not find any improvement in performanceover random search 5x.
Figure 3: Hyperdyn tuned Adamas β1 → 0 and β2 is around 1, i.e. the momentum coefficient β1 becomes very small (Fig. 3(b)).
Figure 4: Top-1% Acc. of Hyperdyn vs Manualeralization accuracy of a training process, and propose a probabilistic “wait-and-watch” strategy.
