Figure 1: True Longitude versus Time of Posting. In these boxplots, we limit users to one imageselected at random to decouple any user effects from time of day. What this image implies is thatthe prior distribution for image longitude rdiffers by the time of day that an image is posted. As anexaple, consider longitudes near 0. It would take less evidence to predict a longitude close to zerofor an image posted around 01:00 UTC tahn to make a similar preidction at 21:00 UTC becauseof the observed priors. At 21:00 UTC, the boxplot indicates images are typically as far from zerolongitude as will been seen in the data.
Figure 2: Coarse mesh and fine mesh classification structure for classification models developed inthis paper. The red triangles indicate regions where the number of images per cell meets the criteriafor training. The coarse mesh was generated with an early dataset of 2M YFCC100M images,but final training was performed by populating those cells with all training data without additionalrefinement. The fine and fineP meshes were generated with all available imagery (14M). The finemesh does a better job at representing geographic regions, for example, the water/land interface ofSpain and Portugal becomes evident. However, this is masked with the coarser mesh, which lacksfidelity to natural geographic boundaries.
Figure 3: Album model with component details added. Operator 1 is a filtering and re-normalizationof M1: Geolocation output. At operator (1) the output of M1 is filtered to output only the top 10mesh cell probabilities (making it mostly sparse) re-normalized to sum to 1. Training of M2 andM3 was only done on the validation data of M1 (using a new random split of test-validation). Timeinputs are concatenated to filtered and normalized outputs at (1) and a new training step is implied.
Figure 4: Fine-mesh based query-by-example on Im2GPS 2K random testing dataset for a qualitativeassement for model generalization. The L2 distance is computed and shown below the top sixqueried results.
