Figure 1: A simplified schematic of the original Improved-GAN techniqueMoreover, Improved-GAN uses the feature matching technique to address the instability issue ofthe generator. In contrast to traditional GAN techniques which try to maximize the output of thediscriminator for generated samples, feature matching tries to maximize the matching between thestatistics of the generated and real samples inside the discriminator:LfeatUre_matching = ||Ex~Pdata f (X)- Ez~Pz(z)f (G(Z)) ||	(3)where f(x) represents the output of an activation function ofan intermediate layer of the discriminator.
Figure 2: Architecture 1: the proposed semi-supervised regression with GAN (Reg-GAN) where boththe D(x) and predicted labels are generated from the deep convolutional neural network. xgen, xlab,and xunlab represent the unlabeled generated, labeled real and unlabeled real samples respectively.
Figure 3: Architecture 2: the proposed semi-supervised regression with GAN (Reg-GAN) whereonly the labels are predicted by the deep convolutional neural network (CNN). xgen , xlab, and xunlabrepresent the unlabeled generated, labeled real and unlabeled real samples respectively.
Figure 4: Sample generated images by using (a) Architecture 1, (b) Architecture 2, and (c) Improved-GAN when 1000 labeled samples are used for training.
Figure 5: Train and test errors are compared over 400 iterations using (a) Architecture 1, (b)Architecture 2, and (c) Improved-GAN when 2000 labeled images are used6	Conclusion and Future WorkThis work concerned solving the semi-supervised regression task by incorporating generative adver-sarial networks. The conventional semi-supervised learning with GAN are suitable for classificationtask that is using them for the regression task requires to convert continuous labels to a limited numberof classes. This conversion will add the quantization error to the training, and also determining thenumber of classes for each application is non-trivial. This work proposes a semi-supervised regression7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018task using GAN which overcomes the above mentioned problems that arise using semi-supervisedclassification techniques to solve the regression task. We did experiments on a publicly availabledriving dataset where continuous steering angles were used as the labels with the correspondingimages. We showed that our proposed approaches outperform the state-of-the-art Improved-GANtechnique in the literature. We summarize our plan for future work in the following:1.	The idea of this work can be extended to cover classification problems as well by assigningthe regression label output to predict the class labels. However, the performance of thisapproach on the classification problems needs to be investigated.
