Table 1: Validating our re-implementation. We validate our few-shot classificationimplementation on the mini-ImageNet dataset using a Conv-4 backbone. We report the mean of600 randomly generated test episodes as well as the 95% confidence intervals. Our reproducedresults to all few-shot methods do not fall behind by more than 2% to the reported results in theliterature. We attribute the slight discrepancy to different random seeds and minor implementationdifferences in each method. “Baseline*" denotes the results without applying data augmentationduring training. ProtoNet# indicates performing 30-way classification in 1-shot and 20-way in5-shot during the meta-training stage.
Table 2: Few-shot classification results for both the mini-ImageNet and CUB datasets. TheBaseline++ consistently improves the Baseline model by a large margin and is competitive with thestate-of-the-art meta-learning methods. All experiments are from 5-way classification with aConv-4 backbone and data augmentation.
Table 3: 5-shot accuracy under thecross-domain scenario with a ResNet-18backbone. Baseline outperforms all othermethods under this scenario.
Table A1: Relationship between domain adaptation and few-shot classification. The twofield-of-studies have overlapping in the development. Notation ”*” indicates minor domain shiftsexist between base and novel classes.
Table A2: Different terminology used in other works. Notation ”-” indicates the term is the sameas in this paper.
Table A3: Few-shot classification results for both the Omniglot and Omniglot→EMNIST. Allexperiments are from 5-way classification with a Conv-4 backbone and without data augmentation.
Table A4: Baseline with softmax and 1-NN classifier in test stage. We note that we use cosinedistance in 1-NN.
Table A5: Detailed statistics in Figure 3. We put exact value here for reference.
Table A6: 5-way meta-training and N-way meta-testing experiment. The experimental resultsare on mini-ImageNet with 5-shot. We could see Baseline++ compares favorably against othermethods in both shallow or deeper backbone settings.
