Figure 1: The matrix form of various neural network parameterized metrics at initialization time (theEuclidean metric is included as reference). Our metric is the most amenable for training since is hasthe least random noise. By contrast, the A>A and pullback metrics are less amenable for training asthe diagonals are less pronounced and the matrices begin looking more like random noise.
Figure 2: The simple graphs we consider. The first four can be represented by canonical manifolds,while the last two can not be captured by any known Riemannian manifold.
Figure 3: Geodesics and 2D embeddings on the graphs. Each column correspond to the geodesicsconnected to a point (highlighted in red). The contours show the geodesic distances. The deep metricaccurately captures the node distances and induces non-trivial geodesics.
Figure 4: A visualization of our learned embed-ding for the protein graph. We draw the graphnodes (given in blue) and edges connecting neigh-bors. Our method is able to capture the nontrivialgeometry of the graph.
Figure 5: Fitting simple Euclidean geodesics. The blue curves are the learned geodesics, and the graycurves are the ground truth. On the left, the ground truth is warped by going through the VAE. Ourmethod is able to recover the Euclidean geodesics, while Beik-Mohammadi et al. (2021) producesvery inaccurate geodesics.
Figure 6: We learn the metric to recovergeodesics in SE(2)6	DiscussionNontrivial Topology. In this work, we only considered Riemannian manifolds on Rn . While ourtheory and results show that we can capture nontrivial topological structure, extending our method tonontrivial topologies might be a useful inductive bias. The challenge that needs to be overcome is theconstruction of the logarithmic map, as one would have to solve a BVP across different charts.
Figure 7: Geodesics and 2D embeddings on the Tree40 graph, where each column correspond to thegeodesics connected to a point (highlighted in red). The contours show the geodesic distances. Thedeep metric accurately captures the node distances and induces non-trivial geodesics.
