Figure 1: Comparison of the normalized gamma distribution and the normalized inverse-gammadistribution: the distribution functions of wi s.
Figure 2: Comparison of the DI and MSP values of trained prediction model when sampling biasexists in training data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school and COMPASdatasets represent the pointwise 2-se (standard error) confidence intervals.
Figure 3: Sensitive analysis for the Lq robust fairness algorithm. (a) We compare the test DI valuesfor sensitive analysis of α. We fix q = 1.5 and δ = 0.6. (b) For sensitive analysis of q, we comparethe test accuracy when q = 1.5 and q = 2. We fix δ = 0.6 and α = 0.5. The tuning parameter λ isselected when the test DI value is similar to 0.03. In each figure, the colored bands represent thepointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 4: Comparison of the DI and MSP values of trained prediction model when sampling biasexists in test data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school and COMPAS datasetsrepresent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 5: Comparison of the fairness values and sensitive analysis of q for UIF based on the Adultdataset when sampling bias exists in test data.
Figure 6: Comparison of the prediction performance when sampling bias exists in training data.
Figure 7: Comparison of the prediction performance when sampling bias exists in test data. Classifi-cation accuracies are presented for prediction models trained with the DI constraint, and AUCs arepresented for prediction models trained with the MSP constraint.
Figure 8: Sensitive analysis for the Lq robust fairness algorithm with the MSP constraint. (a) Wecompare the test MSP values for sensitive analysis of α. We fix q = 1.5 and δ = 0.6. (b) For sensitiveanalysis of q, we compare the test AUC when q = 1.5 and q = 2. We fix δ = 0.6 and α = 0.5. Thetuning parameter λ is selected when the test MSP value is similar to 0.03. In each figure, the coloredbands represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 9: Comparison of the fairness values for UIF based on the Bank, Law school and COMPASSdatasets when sampling bias exists in test data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Lawschool and COMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 10: Sensitive analysis of q for UIF based on the Bank, Law school, and COMPAS datasetswhen sampling bias exists in test data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school andCOMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 11: Comparison of the fairness values for UIF based on the Adult, Bank, Law school, andCOMPAS dataset when sampling bias exists in training data. The colored bands for each line of theBank, Law school and COMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervalsFigure 12: Sensitive analysis of q for UIF based on the Adult, Bank, Law school, and COMPASdataset when sampling bias exists in training data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Lawschool and COMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022AdultBankLaw schoolCOMPASBatch	Mini-batchmethodBatch	Mini-batchmethodFigure 13: Comparison of the batch learning and mini-batch learning. The colored bands for eachline are the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 12: Sensitive analysis of q for UIF based on the Adult, Bank, Law school, and COMPASdataset when sampling bias exists in training data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Lawschool and COMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022AdultBankLaw schoolCOMPASBatch	Mini-batchmethodBatch	Mini-batchmethodFigure 13: Comparison of the batch learning and mini-batch learning. The colored bands for eachline are the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 13: Comparison of the batch learning and mini-batch learning. The colored bands for eachline are the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 14: Comparison of the DI and MSP values of trained DNN models when sampling bias existsin training data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school and COMPAS datasetsrepresent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 15: Comparison of the prediction performances of trained DNN models under the robustfairness constraint when sampling bias exists in training data. Classification accuracies are presentedfor DNN models trained with the DI constraint, and AUCs are presented for DNN models trainedwith the MSP constraint. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school and COMPASdatasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 16: Comparison of the DI and MSP values of trained DNN models when sampling bias existsin test data. The colored bands for each line of the Bank, Law school and COMPAS datasets representthe pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 17: Comparison of the prediction performance of DNN models when sampling bias exists intest data. Classification accuracies are presented for DNN models trained with DI constraint, andAUCs are presented for DNN models trained with MSP constraint. The colored bands for each lineof the Bank, Law school and COMPAS datasets represent the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 18: Comparison of the Lq and L∞ constraints for balanced data cases. The colored bands foreach line are the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
Figure 19: Comparison of the Lq and L∞ constraints for imbalanced data cases. The colored bandsfor each line are the pointwise 2-se confidence intervals.
