Figure 1: The illustration of Example 1 for m-OT. The green points and blue points are respectively thesupports of the empirical measures μn and Vn. Black solid arrows represent the optimal mappings between μnand νn . Red solid arrows represent misspecified mappings. The 5 × 5 matrix is the incomplete transportationmatrix πPOT m ,P m which is created from solving OT between PXm and PYm. The boldness of color of arrowsand entries of the transportation matrix represents their mass values.
Figure 2: The illustration of Example 1 for m-POT. The meanings of green, blue points and arrows are similarto those in Figure 1. The parameter s is a fraction of masses of POT. The 5 × 5 matrix is the incompletetransportation matrix πPPOTms ,P m which is created from solving POT between PXm and PYm . The boldness ofcolor of arrows and entries of the transportation matrix represent their mass values.
Figure 3: Performance of m-POT on deep DA when changing the fraction of masses s. The optimal values of s,which achieve the best accuracy, are marked by ? symbol. In the left figure, the optimal ratios for digits datasetslie between 0.8 and 0.9. In the middle figure, the best-performing values are smaller, from 0.5 to 0.7. On theVisDA dataset in the right figure, the optimal fraction of masses is 0.75.
Figure 4: The illustration of Example 1 for m-UOT. As in Figure 1, the green points and blue points arerespectively the supports of the empirical measures μn and Vn. Black solid arrows represent the optimalmappings between μn and Vn. Red solid arrows represent misspecified mappings. Dashed arrows are mappingsthat have very small masses. The parameter τ is the coefficient of the marginal relaxation term of UOT. The5 × 5 matrix is the incomplete transportation matrix πPUO mφ ,P m which is created from solving UOT betweenPXm and PY m . The boldness of color of arrows and entries of the transportation matrix represent their massvalues.
Figure 5: The UOT’s illustration of Example 1 with supports of measures are scaled by 10. As in Figure 1, thegreen points and blue points are respectively the supports of the empirical measures μn and νn Black solidarrows represent the optimal mappings between μn and Vn. Red solid arrows represent misspecified mappings.
Figure 6:	The POT’s illustration of Example 1 supports of measures are scaled by 10. As in Figure 1, the greenpoints and blue points are respectively the supports of the empirical measures μn and νn Black solid arrowsrepresent the optimal mappings between μn and Vn. Red solid arrows represent misspecified mappings. Dashedarrows are mappings that have very small masses. The parameter s is the fraction of masses POT. The 5 × 5matrix is the incomplete transportation matrix πPPOTms ,P m which is created from solving UOT between PXmand PY m . The boldness of color of arrows and entries of the transportation matrix represent their mass values.
Figure 7:	The illustration of Example 1 in the non-overlapping case for both UOT, POT, and OT (POT s = 1).
Figure 8: The first row presents sample mappings between μn and Vn from different methods. These mappingsare extracted from the transportation matrices which are shown in the second row. Blue lines represent optimalmappings while silver lines represent misspecified mappings. The boldness of the lines and entries of matricesare subject to their masses. There are three numbers near the name of mini-batch methods that are the totalnumber of mappings, the number of misspecified mappings, and the number of optimal mappings respectively.
Figure 9: The first row presents sample mappings between μn and Vn from different methods. These mappingsare extracted from the transportation matrices which are shown in the second row. Blue lines represent optimalmappings while silver lines represent misspecified mappings. The boldness of the lines and entries of matricesare subject to their masses. There are three numbers near the name of mini-batch methods that are the totalnumber of mappings, the number of misspecified mappings, and the number of optimal mappings respectively.
Figure 10: Color Transfer results from m-OT, m-POT with k = 10000, m = 100. The leftmost image isthe source image and the rightmost image is the target image. In between images transferred images with thecorresponding name of the method on top.
Figure 11: Gradient flows from different mini-batch methods. The Wasserstein-2 distance between twomeasures in each step is reported at the top of the corresponding image.
Figure 12:	CIFAR10 generated images from m-OT and m-POT (best choice of s), (k,m) = (2,100). The FIDscores are reported in the title of images.
Figure 13:	CelebA generated images from m-OT and m-POT (best choice of s), (k,m) = (2,200). The FIDscores are reported in the title of images.
Figure 14:	Time taken to run one iteration in seconds in deep DA on digits datasets. All experiments is runwith a mini-batch size m = 500. k is set to 1 in the first row and 2 in the second row.
