Figure 1: (a) Design trees of agents. (b) A non-exhaustive set of distributed training schemes usedby popular RL agents and easily configurable. Execution of Rollouts collection (R) and Gradientcomputation (G) tasks can be either Centralised (C, executed only in 1 Worker) or Parallelized(P), and either Synchronous (S) or Asynchronous (A). Scheme component allows to define trainingarchitectures.
Figure 2: Experimental results on Atari 2600 (a) and Pybullet (b) environments with differentdistributed training schemes. We train each scheme 3 times, with different random seeds and withrandom weight initialization, and plot the mean training curve. Plots were smoothed using a movingaverage with window size of 100 points.
Figure 3: Scaling Performance with multiple machines. Frames-per-Second (FPS), Policy Lag(PL) and Gradient Asynchroy (GA) of different training schemes in increasingly large clusters. Wedo not plot curves that remain constant to 0 as cluster size increases.
Figure 4: Train and test curves on the Obstacle tower Unity3D challenge environment. We usea rolling window size of size 20 to plot the maximum and the minimum obtained scores duringtraining, and a window of size 250 for the training mean. A video recording of the best policy isavailable at https://youtu.be/L442rrVnDr4In our last experiment we train a RL agent on the Obstacle Tower Unity3D environment over acluster with 64 CPU cores and 6 GPUs and compare it against the state-of-the-art, obtained duringthe challenge competition organized by Unity Technologies upon the environment release. We trainan agent on a fixed set of seeds [0, 100) for approximately 11 days and test its behaviour on seeds1001 to 1005, a procedure designed by the authors of the challenge to evaluate weak generalizationcapacities of RL agents (Juliani et al., 2019). The obstacle environment consists on navigating aseries of rooms connected by one or more doors. The action space is discrete (e.g. move forward,turn right, jump, move back, etc). The observation is an image of 84x84x3, no map is available.
Figure 5: Obstacle tower Unity3D challenge environment.
