Figure 1: ImageNet one-shot performance averaged over all target datasets: Aircraft, Bird, COCO,Describable Texture, Flower, Fungi, Omniglot, Quickdraw and Traffic Sign. (Left) Fine-tuning per-formance, (Center) Matching Network performance and (Right) Prototypical Network performance.
Figure 2:	Comparison of the standard classification performance on classes seen during training(in-distribution performance) and the few-shot performance. Standard classification performanceis on the ImageNet test set for classes seen during training. Few-shot performance is the one-shotperformance averaged over all target datasets: Aircraft Bird, COCO, Describable Texture, Flower,Fungi, Omniglot, QUickdraW and Traffic Sign.
Figure 3:	Few-shot performance for multiple train-target pairs of natural image datasets. For eachplot, the train dataset is written on the left and the target dataset on top. X-axis is the percentageof the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way 5-shot accuracy. For 5-way 1-shot accuracy, seesection A.2. Both 5-way 5-shot and 1-shot follow similar trends.
Figure 4:	(Top row) models trained on the dataset marked on top of each plot and evaluated onOmniglot. (Bottom row) models trained on Omniglot and evaluated on the dataset marked on top ofeach respective column. X-axis is the percentage of the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way5-shot accuracy. For 5-way 1-shot accuracy, see section A.2. Both 5-way 5-shot and 1-shot followsimilar trends.
Figure 5: Scaling number of training classes results for various train-target pairs. For each plot,models are trained on the dataset marked on the left of each respective row and evaluated on thedataset marked top of each respective column. X-axis is the percentage of the total number oftraining classes of each dataset and y-axis is the 5-way 5-shot accuracy. For 5-way 1-shot results,see section A.2. Both 5-way 5-shot and 1-shot follow similar trends.
Figure 6: Scaling training data 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on COCO. Datasets markedon the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance. X-axis is thepercentage of the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way 1-shot accuracy.
Figure 7:	Scaling training data 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on Fungi. Datasets markedon the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance. X-axis is thepercentage of the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way 1-shot accuracy.
Figure 8:	Scaling training data 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on ImageNet. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 9:	Scaling training data 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on COCO. Datasets markedon the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance. X-axis is thepercentage of the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way 5-shot accuracy.
Figure 10:	Scaling training data 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on Fungi. Datasets markedon the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance. X-axis is thepercentage of the total training data and y-axis is the 5-way 5-shot accuracy.
Figure 11: Scaling training data 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on ImageNet. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 12:	Scaling training classes 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on COCO. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 13:	Scaling training classes 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on Fungi. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 14:	Scaling training classes 5-way 1-shot results for models trained on ImageNet. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 15:	Scaling training classes 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on COCO. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 16:	Scaling training classes 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on Fungi. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
Figure 17: Scaling training classes 5-way 5-shot results for models trained on ImageNet. Datasetsmarked on the left of each plot are the evaluation dataset. Last plot is the average performance.
