Figure 1: Representation of a generic fixer block and its operations. The input hi(δ) is a tensor ofdimensions Hi × Wi × Ci where Hi and Wi are the spatial dimension and Ci is the number of featuremaps (or channels). The parameter ρ, called compression factor, simply defines the compression ofthe feature channels carried out by the 1 × 1 convolution; in the experiments ρ = 4.
Figure 2: Representation of a model divided in b = 3 blocks with the addition of 2 fixer modules.
Figure 3: Ablation study. Accuracy computed on the test set of CIFAR10 under different attacks.
Figure 4: Accuracy on the CIFAR10 test set under different attacks. Comparison between the pro-posed method (fx-a; fx-b), traditional adversarial training (adv train) (Goodfellow et al., 2015),feature denoising blocks (denoise) (Xie et al., 2019) and distribution regression network (drn) (Kouet al., 2020). All models have been trained using D[t1r0%] and adversarial samples generated usingAutoPGD where necessary (highlighted by dashed box). Base has been trained on the full trainingset of clean images. Error bars are smaller than the size of the symbols.
Figure 5: Accuracy on the CIFAR10 test set under different attacks varying the amount of dataavailable for training. Comparison between the proposed method (fx-a; fx-b), traditional adversarialtraining (adv train), feature denoising blocks (denoise) and distribution regression network (drn).
Figure 6: Performance on the CIFAR10 test set under different attacks when changing the attackused during training phase. Note that methods base and drn do not require generating adversarialsamples, thus their performance is the same across the plots. A dashed box highlights the attackused for generating the adversarial samples in each plot. All models have been trained with D[t1r0%] .
Figure 7: Accuracy on the histopathology (HIST) test set under different attacks varying the amountof data available for training. Comparison between the proposed method (fx-a) and standard adver-sarial training (adv train). All methods have been trained using AutoPGD (highlighted by dashedbox) to generate the adversarial samples. Error bars are smaller than the size of the symbols.
