Figure 1: Example of candidate features of a lesion. The ground truth and the confusing backgroundregion are denoted as red and yellow bounding boxes, respectively.
Figure 2: Mini-batch configuration using Cut&Remain data augmentation during training. Theyellow box refer to bounding box annotation B = (cx , cy , w, h). The augmented samples withdifferent aspect ratios are added to current mini-batch.
Figure 3: Overview of the augmented images from the baseline (Cutout, Mixup, and Cutmix) basedon a supervised procedure on the Clavicle X-ray dataset. The red boxes refer to bounding boxannotations.
Figure 4: The class-wise precision on the MS-COCOs dataset. The bars represent the resultsachieved by using baseline and Cut&Remain, respectively. Cut&Remain improves results on diffi-cult classes, like hair drier, backpack, and toothbrushimprovement using Cut&Remain was relatively small compared to the previous tasks, which con-sidered medical images, because objects are distributed in various locations in the natural imagedomain. As a result, using the location information of the lesion is difficult.
Figure 6: Grad-CAM visualization on MS-COCOs test images. Ground-truth annotation are shownas a red boxes.
Figure 5: Grad-CAM visualization on test images using the model trained with each augmentationtechnique. Left: Grad-CAM for abnormal class. Right: Grad-CAM for normal class. Ground-truthannotation are shown as a red boxes.
Figure 7: Effect of the Cut&Remain and augmented images in the training dataset (in Clavicle X-raydataset)4.4.3	Performance according the number of annotationsWe evaluated the performance according amounts of the training dataset applying Cut&Remain. Theratio γ of the training data applying Cut&Remain was {0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}. The performance ofCut&Remain with different γ is given in Figure 6. The Cut&Remain achieved the best performanceafter augmentation was applied to the overall training dataset (i.e., γ = 1.0). Furthermore, theAUC-ROC and F1-score monotonically increased with γ ; therefore, the performance improvementis guaranteed even if limited number of annotations are available.
