Figure 1: Physical Design Problem for the Formula SAE racing vehicle (Soria Zurita et al., 2018)Figure 1 illustrates the physical design problem using the example of the Formula SAE racing ve-hicle from systems engineering literature (Soria Zurita et al., 2018). The design of a Formula SAEracing vehicle comprises 11 subsystems such as the tires, suspensions, engine, cabin, impact attenua-tor and wings. Each subsystem is described using multiple parameters listed above. For example, thetire components have radius, pressure, x position and mass as parameters. There are 39 parametersthat describe the vehicle’s design space. A more detailed design could consider higher dimensionaldescription, such as the 3D shape of the wings, to better estimate wind-drag. The design objectives2Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022capture the designer’s underlying preferences for the system. The 11 objectives listed above can bea mixture of target performance such as the preferred height of the center of gravity, and optimiza-tion metrics such as maximizing acceleration and minimizing drag. While some of these objectivescould be analytical domain models, the accurate computation of quantities such as drag requiresslow blackbox proprietary software (Rider, 2013). The slow physics domain models need to beapproximated by faster surrogate specification models that can allow more efficient exploration andoptimization. Further, a possible spread of performance over the objectives of the exemplar vehicledesigns is illustrated in the radar plot in the top right corner in blue. The performance of a target ve-hicle design configuration is shown in red. The target requires us to have much higher velocity andacceleration while reducing drag, height of center of gravity and crash force. Designs must also be
Figure 2: DeLPhy uses exemplar designs to learn a variational encoder (VAE) where the decoderis trained with dropout. The latent space represents the learned design manifold. The specificationnetwork predicts the design objectives from the latent space. The VAE and the specification networkare jointly trained on the exemplar designs and their evaluation on physics models. In the designexploration stage, we condition on the new target design objectives and use temperature annealedHMC to sample the latent space, moving towards optimal designs exploiting the gradient informa-tion. Further, Monte Carlo dropout in the decoder leads to multiple design samples for a sampledlatent design, which are then passed through the encoder and the specification network to determinea distribution over the design objectives. High variance/uncertainty implies off-manifold designsthat may not be unrealizable. DeLPhy finds multiple diverse optimal design configurations.
Figure 3: Variance in the predicted thickness while annealing.
Figure 4: DeLPhy can find propellers withhigh efficiency at relatively low speed.
Figure 5: Uncertainty quantification detects unreliable designs during exploration.
Figure 6: DeLPhy generates diverse designs with different numbers of blades, shape of blades, andhub diameter for similar velocity and efficiency objective. More details in Appendix C and E.
Figure 7: DeLPhy can reliably generate SAE race vehicle designs satisfying the design objective.
Figure 8: DeLPhy generates vehicleswith different engines, tires and brakes(color denotes the third dimension).
Figure 9: DeLPhy can reliably generate air vehicle designs satisfying the design objective.
Figure 10: DeLPhy generates air vehicleswith different key parameters.
Figure 11: Key geometric properties of a propeller. The front surface is colored in red and theback surface is colored in green. The grid denotes lengthwise and chordwise discretization for thenumerical computation.
Figure 12: We show three views to illustrate the 3D shape of the propeller - 1) frontal view, 2) viewat a 45 degree angle, and 3) side view. The front surface is colored in red and the back surfaceis colored in green. The grid denotes lengthwise and chordwise discretization for the numericalcomputation.
Figure 13: DeLPhy generates diverse designs (with different numbers of blades, shape of blades,pitch angles, and hub diameter) for similar velocity and efficiency objective.
Figure 14: DeLPhy generates diverse designs (with different numbers of blades, shape of blades,pitch angles, and hub diameter) for similar velocity and efficiency objective.
Figure 15: DeLPhy generates a more diverse set of designs, with a different numbers of blades, theshape of blades, pitch angles, and hub diameter, compared to CMA-ES (Hansen, 2006) which is adirect optimization approach.
