Figure 1: GCN-SL consists of three stages: (S1) re-connected graph, (S2) efficient spectral clus-tering with anchors, and (S3) graph convolutional networks with structure learning. In (S1), weconstruct a re-connected adjacency matrix A* via similarity learning, and the re-connected graphcan be gradually optimized with the training of the GCN-SL model. In (S2), ESC-ANCH generatesthe SC features F. In (S3), we combine the original features X and SC features F as the enhancedfeatures H, and perform feature aggregation on H by using the A* and A, respectively. Further-more, several key results of aggregation and the H are combined as the Hcb , and then A and A*are used for performing feature aggregation on H, respectively. Finally, a learnable weighted vectorw is used to highlight important dimensions of Hcb , which makes GCN-SL adapts to graphs withvarious levels of homophily.
Figure 2: Visualization of the graPh structures. The graPh-structured data is a real-world graPh,namely the Wisconsin network, where color indicates the labels of nodes. The original graPh isshown in (a) and the re-connected graPh learned by GCN-SLcc is shown in (c). We fade the remain-ing nodes and edges to emPhasize the neighbors of selected node in (b) and (d).
Figure 3:	Ablation study about SC features on the proposed GCN-SL, w/o denotes without.
Figure 4:	Performance of Multi-layer GCNs and the proposed GCN-SLcc on Cora. GCN-SLcc-3, 4,5 represent the GCN-SLcc with different rounds of aggregation K respectively (i.e., K equal to 3,4, and 5).
Figure 5: Flowchart of the graph structure learning. The graph-structured data is a real-world graph,namely the Texas network, where color indicates the labels of nodes. Through data preprocess-ing and similarity learning, we obtain a re-connected graph. The re-connected graph is optimizedtogether with the parameters of GCN-SL. Finally, we can obtain a re-connected graph with highhomophily.
Figure 6: Comparisons of homophily ratio h on networks, including the original graphs, initializedgraphs and the re-connected graphs.
