Figure 1: Left: The 197 × 197 position bias from the 3rd layer of DAFT-full. Right: relativeposition biases learned by a DAFT-conv. Each row represents a layer (with layer index ranging from{0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10}); Each column represents a head.
Figure 2: Effectiveness of the global connectivity of DAFT-conv, with varied kernel size on Ima-geNet. DAFT-conv’s performance is robust to the kernel size. When removing the global connec-tivity, small kernel sizes lead to severe performance degradation.
Figure 3: Exponentiated position biases learned by DAFT-full, trained on ImageNet-1K, shown fromlayer 1, 2, ..., 12, arranged from top left to bottom right. Each image is of size 197 × 197, wherethe first element corresponds to the class token, and the remaining 196 correspond to the 14 × 14positions. We see that local, sparse patterns are learned without explicit supervision.
Figure 4: Image completion with the AFT-local trained on CIFAR10 autoregressive modeling task.
Figure 5: Training dynamics of DAFT, compared with baseline models on ImageNet. DAFT-convenjoys faster convergence than others.
Figure 6: The top 1 test accuracy of finetuning a pretrained DeiT model to DAFT-conv (DAFT-conv-ft), compared that initialized from random (DAFT-conv-rand). DAFT-conv benefits greatly from apretrained DeiT model, indicating the compatibility between the two family of models.
Figure 7: Performance of DeiT vs DAFT-conv, as model size scales.
Figure 8: Exponentiated position biases learned by DAFT-conv, trained on ImageNet-1K. Each rowcorresponds to a layer, each column corresponds to a head (the first 16 are shown). This model hastop 1 accuracy of 80.8%.
Figure 9: Exponentiated position biases learned by DAFT-conv (kernel size 11 × 11) with sparsityregularization, trained on ImageNet-1K. Each row corresponds to a layer, each column correspondsto a head (the first 16 are shown). This model has top 1 accuracy of 80.9%.
Figure 10: Exponentiated position biases learned DAFT-conv (kernel size 11 × 11) with Gumbelsoftmax sampling, trained on ImageNet-1K. Each row corresponds to a layer, each column corre-sponds to a head (the first 16 are shown). This model has top 1 accuracy of 79.9%.
Figure 11: Top: sample image from the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Bottom: visualization ofthe keys for DAFT-conv, with each row corresponding to a layer, each column corresponding to ahead.
Figure 12: Top: sample image from the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Bottom: visualization ofthe keys for DAFT-conv, with each row corresponding to a layer, each column corresponding to ahead.
Figure 13: Top: sample image from the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Bottom: visualization ofthe keys for DAFT-conv, with each row corresponding to a layer, each column corresponding to ahead.
Figure 14: Top: sample image from the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Bottom: visualization ofthe keys for DAFT-conv, with each row corresponding to a layer, each column corresponding to ahead.
