Figure 1: Comparison of representations after the i-th epoch and the final one done by RTD,1-CKA, and disagreement of predictions. All the measures are normalized by division to theirmaximal values. Strikingly, RTD highly correlates with the disagreement of models’ predictions.
Figure 2: Point clouds used in “clusters” (top) and “rings” (bottom) experiments.
Figure 3: Examples of R-Cross-Barcodes for experiments with synthetic point clouds.
Figure 4: Representations’ comparison measures for the “clusters” point clouds. Ideally, the evalu-ation measure should monotonically change with the increase of topological complexity.
Figure 5: Representations’ comparison measures for the “rings” point clouds. Ideally, the evaluationmeasure should monotonically change with the increase of topological complexity.
Figure 6: dSprites generated across directions in the latent space, top: random direction, bottom:axis-aligned direction, corresponds to an interpretable factor of variation.
Figure 7: Multi-dimensionalscaling of 90 random ar-chitectures from NAS-Bench-NLP. Color depicts log. per-plexity.
Figure 9: Analysis of ResNet-20 representations under different data distribution shifts. The dy-namics of scaled metrics with the monotonic transformations of images.
Figure 8: The representation dif-ferences between the layer blockswithin trained networks. Thecolumns correspond to the archi-tecture, and the rows correspond tothe metric.
Figure 10: Scaled metrics demonstrating the difference between representations of CIFAR-100 andCIFAR-10 datasets during fine-tune process.
Figure 11: R-Cross-Barcodes for the “clusters” experiments. Top: R-Cross-Barcode(P, P), Bottom:CC	ɪʌ	1 / 7~⅛ 7-»\ 7-» ∙ , 1	∙ , 1 Fl ∙	1	Sacxlx-YCTAI,R-Cross-Barcode(P, P). P - is the point cloud having one cluster, P - 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12 clusters.
Figure 12: R-Cross-Barcodes for the “rings” experiments. Top: R-Cross-Barcode(P, P ), Bottom:R-Cross-Barcode(P, P). P - is the point cloud having 5 rings, P - 4, 3, 2, 1 rings.
Figure 13: Analysis of ResNet-20 representations under different data distribution shifts. The dy-namics of scaled metrics with monotonic application of various types of image transformations.
