Figure 1: Performance of estimators in the standard benchmark. The top row shows the performanceof each estimator in the standard benchmark, and the bottom row shows the performance of MIestimators with nonlinear transformation, namely Y 7→ Y 3. For the two experiments, we increasedthe MI by 2 every 4000 iterations, and 20000 iterations in total. The ground truth of MI is markedblack. The light/dark color lines are the real estimates and their smoothed values.
Figure 2: Bias-variance trade-offs of estimators in the standard benchmark. The top row shows theperformance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row show the performance inthe Cubic task.
Figure 3: Bias-variance trade-offs of estimators in the extension benchmark. The top row shows theperformance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row show the performance inthe Cubic task. IMICE is less biased and more accurate than the other estimators.
Figure 4: Results of GAN and MICE regluarization on 25 Gaussians dataset. Illustration on the leftis the target samples. The middle and the right plots are generated by a vanilla GAN and generatedby GAN regularized by MI estimated by MICE.
Figure 5: Performance of estimators in the extension benchmark of different ρ. The top row showsthe performance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row show the performancein the Cubic task. The correlation P between samples ranges from 0.1 to 0.5.
Figure 6:	Performance of estimators in the extension benchmark of a random selection of ρ. Thetop row shows the performance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row showthe performance in the Cubic task. The correlation ρ between samples uniformly ranges from 0.0 to0.5.
Figure 7:	Bias-variance trade-offs of estimators in the extension benchmark with random ρ. The toprow shows the performance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row show theperformance in the Cubic task. IMICE is less biased and more accurate than the other estimators.
Figure 8:	Performance of estimators in the extension benchmark (Section 5.2 related). The toprow shows the performance of each estimator in the Gaussian task, and the bottom row show theperformance in the Cubic task.
