Figure 1: Illustration of Scene Text Detection and Contextual Text Detection problems: Given inputimages in the first column, scene text detection approaches usually detect integral text units onlywhich contain incomplete textual information as shown in the second column. Differently, the con-textual text detection problem aims to contextual text blocks which consist of multiple integral textsin proper reading order.
Figure 2: The framework of the proposed contextual text detector (CUTE): Given a scene textimage as input, CUTE first detects integral text units with an Integral Text Detector. For eachdetected integral text unit, it then learns textual Feature Embeddings, Indexing Embeddings andSpatial Embeddings that capture visual text features, text order features, and text spatial adjacencyfeatures, respectively. In final, it models the relationship of integral text units by learning from thethree types of embeddings with a Contextual Text Block Generator and produces contextual textblocks that convey complete text messages.
Figure 3: Illustration of contextual text block annotation: We annotate each contextual text block byan ordered sequence of integral text units (characters or words) which together convey a completetext message. The two sample images are picked from datasets ReCTS and SCUT-CTW.
Figure 4: Contextual text detection facilitates scene text translation significantly: The output ofCUTE conveys complete text messages which can be better translated to other languages as ‘naturallanguage’ with rich contextual information as shown in column 3. As a comparison, scene textdetectors produce individual text units which can not be translated well as shown in column 2.
Figure 5: Illustration of the proposed SCUT-CTW-Context dataset with different annotations: In-tegral texts that belong to ‘Normal’, ‘Hard’ or ‘Ignore’ classes are highlighted in green, blue andred, respectively. In ‘Hard’ cases, a contextual text block can be split into multiple sub-blocks (linksshown in dotted) each of which conveys a significant textual message.
Figure 6: Sample detection results by the proposed CUTE: Given input images from ReCTS-Context and SCUT-CTW-Context datasets, the proposed CUTE successfully detects the contextualtext blocks in which each integral texts and their orders are shown by yellow boxes and green arrows,respectively.
Figure 7: Typical failure cases of the proposed CUTE: Correct, incorrect and missing integral texts(or orders) are shown by bounding boxes (or arrows) in yellow, red and blue, respectively.
