Figure 1: Updater-Extractor Architecture. The notation is introduced in the subsection 3.1. Thatdashed arrow indicates that no gradient is passed through the connection. The instructions andworld state representation at time t - 1 are passed to the updater which outputs a new world staterepresentation for time t. This updated representation is then queried via the Extractor and theanswers are compared to the ground truth. The gradient is not propagated through wt-1, hencethere is no need to store previous activations as in (Werbos, 1990) or similar algorithms.
Figure 2: “World of numbers” problem setting. a) World state transition example. b) Providing sparseinformation. Left column - true world. Middle - information given at step 1 (black pixels are not shown tothe model). Right - the model’s predictions about the world after only receiving the information in the middlecolumn. Since very little information was given, the model struggles and predicts generic shapes.
Figure 3: Trajectory stability. a) Top-true world state on step 1. Bottom-model beliefs on step 1, after1500 out of 2352 pixels values are provided. Notice that the model captures each handwritten digit style: forexample, ones are tilted at a different angle, reflecting the data. b) A world at t=50, where again, all informationis given on the first step, with no input afterwards. The model has no information about specific digit instances,but knows (from step 1) about their identities. Therefore, the model predicts generic digit shapes with correctidentity. Notice that all digits having the same identity are reconstructed identically. Notably, rolling a world,10, 1000 or a 10000 steps forward with no input information results in visually identical reconstruction, showingthat the model retains its world state knowledge across apparently arbitrary horizons.
Figure 4: Pathfinder challenge problem example. The task is to determine whether the big dots lieon the same path (left) or on different paths (right). This task proved to be fairly challenging for anumber of models (Houtkamp & Roelfsema, 2010; Tay et al., 2020).
