Figure 1: The difference between un-censored data and censored data. Indi-vidual B did not fail until the time of endof study t2 while A failed at t1 which isbefore the end time of study. All we canknow about B is that B did not fail untilt2.
Figure 2: The overview of Assumption-Free Survival Analysis (AFreeSurv) and Local SurvivalSmoothing (LS2) regularizer. Left) We model the hazard function with a neural network followedby the softplus function to ensure that the output of the hazard function is positive. By modelingthe hazard function with a neural network, we do not employ any assumption. Middle) We definelog survival function as the solution of the ODE initial value problem where the ODE is defined asequation 3 and the initial value log S(0 | x) = 0. We calculate the survival function by integratingassumption-free hazard function. This, in turn, returns the assumption-free survival function. Right)The LS2 regularizer encourages the survival function to be locally smooth. At first LS2 finds theneighbor covariate x0 of a covariate x whose log survival probability at time t is most different fromthat of x. After then it minimize the difference between two log survival probability: log S(t | x0)and log S(t | x)2.2	Neural ODEsNeural ODEs are a family of neural network models that define the continuous dynamics of variables(Chen et al., 2018). Starting from z(0), we can define the output z(T) to be the solution of thefollowing ordinary differential equation (ODE) initial value problem.
Figure 3: Density plots of various models on SUPPORT dataset. Uncensored data (•) and censoreddata (X) are drawn at the corresponding time. CoxPH outputs density plots of almost similar shapesacross all samples. DeepHit outputs density plots of relatively various shapes compared to CoxPH orDSM yet the model outputs wiggly density plots as it models discrete-time domain using softmax.
Figure 4: t-SNE plots (Van der Maaten& Hinton, 2008) of SUPPORT test data.
Figure 5: Survival probability plots of diverse samples. UnCenSored data (•) and censored data (X)are drawn at the corresponding time.
