Figure 1: An example the proposed Causal-TGAN with expert knowledge: Given a dataset offive columns A - E and the partial knowledge that A and B are the causes of C , the proposedCaUsal-TGAN constructs a generator following the causal structure of A → C — B .By doing this,the Causal-TGAN can generate a sub-table that only contains columns A, B , and C . We employa conditional GAN to generate the rest of the columns D and E, conditioned on the samples fromthe Causal-TGAN. Finally, we concatenate the output of the conditional GAN (D and E) with thecorresponding conditions (A, B, and C) to form the complete synthetic table. For Causal-TGANoperating with full knowledge (all causal relationships are known), the entire dataset can be generatedwithout the use of another conditional GAN. The part enclosed in dashed lines will not be necessaryas all variables can be generated with the proposed Causal-TGAN.
Figure 2: An example of SCM:The causal graph and the correspondingcausal mechanisms are shown.
Figure 3: Performance of Causal-TGAN for different qualities of expert knowledge. (a)-(c) truegraphs are given in different proportion. (d)-(f) different degrees of graph distortion. Plots for eachdataset are provided in Appendix Dvariables. 100% denotes knowing causal relations for all variables and 0% denotes generatingusing purely conditional GAN 1. For each percentage of knowledge, we randomly generate 10corresponding causal graphs and report the average scores.
Figure 4: Partial Knowledge. (a)-(d) are discrete-only datasets; (e)-(f) are continuous-only datasets;(g)-(h) are mixed datasets.
Figure 5: Wrong Knowledge: fully reversing (Delete=0%). (a)-(d) are discrete-only datasets;(e)-(f) are continuous-only datasets; (g)-(h) are mixed datasets.
Figure 6:	Wrong Knowledge: half deleting and half reversing (Delete=50%). (a)-(d) are discrete-only datasets; (e)-(f) are continuous-only datasets; (g)-(h) are mixed datasets.
Figure 7:	Wrong Knowledge: fully deleting (Delete=100%). (a)-(d) are discrete-only datasets;(e)-(f) are continuous-only datasets; (g)-(h) are mixed datasets.
