Figure 1: SPAR Overview. (a) By incorporating HJ reachability theory into the CMDP framework, we candecompose learning under safety constraints into optimising for performance and updating safety value function.
Figure 2: We uses two classical control benchmarks, double integrator and Dubins’ car, to evaluate theperformance of different learning rules for safety analysis. (a) shows the safety value function of the doubleintegrator and the black line delineates VS (x) = 0, within which the particle can remain within the allowablerange of x ∈ [-1, 1]. (b) shows the iso-surface of the safety value function at 0, i.e., VS (x) = 0, for Dubins’Car, within which the car can reach a unit circle at the origin. The performance comparison is summarized in (c).
Figure 3: Results of SPAR in the CarGoal1-v0 (top row) and PointGoal1-v0 (bottom row) benchmarks, underthe OpenAI Safety Gym framework. In Goal tasks, agents must navigate to observed goal locations (indicatedby the green regions), while avoiding static obstacles (e.g., vases, in cyan) and hazards (blue regions).
Figure 4: We use the Learn-to-Race (L2R) framework (Herman et al., 2021) for evaluation; this environmentprovides simulated racing tracks that are modelled after real-world counterparts, such as the famed ThruxtonCircuit in the UK (Track01:Thruxton, (a)). Here, learning-based agents can be trained and evaluated accordingto challenging metrics and realistic vehicle and environmental dynamics, making L2R a compelling target forsafe reinforcement learning. Each track features challenging components for autonomous agents, such as sharpturns (shown in (b)), where SPAR only uses ego-camera views (shown in (c)) and speed.
Figure 5: (a) We compute the safety value function, via a kinematic vehicle model. (b) We illustrate differentviews of the 4D state space, given fixed velocity and three different yaw angles, indicated by the blue arrows.
Figure 6: Left: Episode percent completion and Right: speed evaluated every 5000 steps over an episode (asingle lap) and averaged over 5 random seeds. Results reported based on Track01:Thruxton in L2R.
