Figure 1: Illustration of how interleaved connec-tions contaminate the choice of neural networkconnections. The red, purple, and green links de-note three candidate connections, among whichthe red one is the best choice (according to the in-dividual evaluation). However, when interleavedconnections (the dashed links) are added for thesearch sampling, the judgment of the candidatesgradually becomes ridiculous. The bottom figuresindicate the weight change of the three candidatesthroughout the search process (warm-up for 20epochs), while (a) is under the interleaving-freesetting and 1-3 interleaved connections are addedfor (b)-(d). Specifically, the interleaved connec-tion (3,7) is added for (b), the connections (1,4),(3,7) added for (c), and (1,4), (2,6), (3,7) addedfor (d).
Figure 2: The studied search space in this paper. Each layer (alsocalled node) can be connected to L precursors. 3 stages are to besearched with N1, N2 and N3 nodes respectively. For better visual-ization, we show the example of L = 4, yet we also study L = 6 andL = 8 which are even more complicated.
Figure 3: The flowchart of IF-NAS. The key is to avoid interleaved connections in any time. Forthis purpose, we repeat a loop with a length of L, and each time part of the connections remainactive and all others are removed. The layers of the same color are always activated and inactivatedtogether. This figure is best viewed in color.
Figure 4: Architectures searched with (left) and without (right) IF. (a): results on 4-chain space. (b):results on 6-chain space. (c): results on 8-chain space. The reserved connections with IF are mainlyserial pattern, which guarantees the depths of architectures. The reserved connections without IFare mainly parallel pattern, resulting in a short longest-path at each stage, that is, the depths ofarchitectures are shallow.
Figure 5: (a): The weight changing curve of candidate in-puts with IF. (b): The weight changing curve of candidateinputs without IF. The darker the color, the closer the corre-sponding candidate inputs are to the activated node.
Figure 6: Results on different spaces using 3 search strate-gies. DNAS indicates the differential-based search withoutIF. The random indicates random search.
Figure 7: More examples of adding differentnumbers of interleaved connections to im-pact the NAS algorithm. (a) is under theinterleaving-free setting and 1-3 interleavedconnections are added for (b)-(d).
Figure 8: Results of randomly sampled architec-tures on CIFAR100 and ImageNet-small. Thehorizontal axis is the depth of the normal cell,and the vertical axis is the accuracy (%).
Figure 9: Normal cell depth ratio of DARTS.
Figure 10:. Architectures searched with IF by Figure 11： Architectures searched without IF byonly reserving one input.	only reserving one input.
