Figure 2: Sample path visualizations for different source-target domain combinations.
Figure 3: Average target domain accuracy and error bars for transfer learning with one-shot (left) andfive-shot (right). Results are taken over 10 independent replications.
Figure 4: The results of flowing a mixture of 4 Gaussian distributions to a mixture of 4 Gaussiandistributions. We demonstrate the initialization (left), the trace of particles in first 200 steps (middle),and the results at step 1000 (right).
Figure 5: The results of flowing a mixture of 2 Gaussian distributions to a mixture of 4 Gaussiandistributions. We demonstrate the initialization (left), the trace of particles in first 200 steps (middle),and the results at step 2400 (right). We use method in Section B.3 to relabel the source data.
Figure 6: Sample path visualizations between FashionMNIST dataset and KMNIST datasetresults as Fig. 2 in high resolution in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. Each picture illustrates one experiment ofgradient flow between two datasets and the samples flow from the source (left) to the target (right).
Figure 7: Sample path visualizations between KMNIST dataset and MNIST dataset8 % 一 3 Jip4>C Y3xt728Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 8: Sample path visualizations between FashionMNIST dataset and MNIST datasetM5 C 7 / 口T £ G 7 , 4二Z 7，UB.5.2 Additional results on transfer learningWe transfer a pretrained classifier from FashionMNIST dataset to KMNIST dataset and from KMNISTdataset to FashionMNIST dataset. We use the same model architecture and training settings as inFig. 3. We illustrate the accuracy and error bars of the 1-shot learning and 5-shot learning in Fig. 9.
Figure 8: Sample path visualizations between FashionMNIST dataset and MNIST datasetM5 C 7 / 口T £ G 7 , 4二Z 7，UB.5.2 Additional results on transfer learningWe transfer a pretrained classifier from FashionMNIST dataset to KMNIST dataset and from KMNISTdataset to FashionMNIST dataset. We use the same model architecture and training settings as inFig. 3. We illustrate the accuracy and error bars of the 1-shot learning and 5-shot learning in Fig. 9.
