Figure 1:	Probability distributions of the training samples (class 0, seed 0) for the MNIST dataset.
Figure 2:	Analysis of the most normal and anomalous samples obtained With different one-classclassification methods on the standard MNIST dataset.
Figure 3: Analysis of the most normal and anomalous samples obtained With different one-classclassification methods on the standards CIFAR-10 dataset.
Figure 4: Conceptron and variations schematic representation.
Figure 5: VAE architecture for MNIST experiments.
Figure 6: VAE architecture for CIFAR-10 experiments.
Figure 7: VAE training feature space projected in 2d via t-SNE. The color of each sample encodesthe probability to be normal.
Figure 8: VAE test feature space projected in 2d via t-SNE. The color of each sample encodes theprobability to be normal.
Figure 9:	Probability distributions of the test samples (class 0, seed 0) for the MNIST dataset.
Figure 10:	Probability distributions of the training samples (class airplane, seed 0) for the CIFAR-10dataset.
Figure 11:	Probability distributions of the test samples (class airplane, seed 0) for the CIFAR-10dataset.
Figure 12: Probability distributions of the training samples (seed 0) for the Breast dataset.
Figure 13: Probability distributionsof the training samples (seed 0) for the Ionosphere dataset.
Figure 14:	Probability distributions of the training samples (seed 0) for the Musk dataset.
Figure 15:	Probability distributions of the training samples (seed 0) for the O dataset.
Figure 16: Probability distributions of the training samples (seed 0) for the Ozone dataset.
Figure 17: Probability distributions of the training samples (seed 0) for the Sonar dataset.
Figure 18: Probability distributionsof the test samples (seed 0) for the Breast dataset.
Figure 19:	Probability distributions of the test samples (seed 0) for the Ionosphere dataset.
Figure 20:	Probability distributions of the test samples (seed 0) for the Musk dataset.
Figure 21:	Probability distributions of the test samples (seed 0) for the O dataset.
Figure 22:	Probability distributions of the test samples (seed 0) for the Ozone dataset.
Figure 23:	Probability distributions of the test samples (seed 0) for the Sonar dataset.
