Figure 1: An illustration of sparse and weak gradient signals from hard pseudo label. (a): Thenumber of pseudo-labels generated per image is much smaller than the number of ground-truth labels,which indicates the supervision signal from pseudo-labels is sparse. (b): In the training process,only a small number of true positive RoIs are sampled with pseudo-labels. A significant amount offoreground RoIs are not sampled (false negative) and a number of background RoIs are mis-sampledas foregrounds (false positive). This indicates the supervision signal from pseudo-labels is also weak.
Figure 2: Overview of CrossMatch. CroSSMatch enforces consistency between different scales offeature maps. The teacher model takes weakly augmented images and produces artificial (in both softand hard form, with a refined OHEM employed for the regions used for soft) with a heuristicallyselected level of features (denoted by red). The student model takes strongly augmented images andconstantly makes predictions with every level of the feature pyramid. The consistency constraint isenforced through both soft and hard pseudo-labels.
Figure 3: (a) and (b): comparison between results with and without multi-scale features for soft labelbranch and hard label branch respectively. (c): comparison between different values of K for OHEM5000	10000	15000	20000	25000	30000Training IterationAnalysis of True Positive RoIs Sampled by CrossMatCh■ Only Hard ■ Hard ∩ Soft ■ Only Soft405000	10000	15000	20000	25000	30000Training Iteration(a) Analysis of RoIs Sampled by Soft Branch	(b) Analysis of True Positive RoIsFigure 4: (a): A quantitative analysis of RoIs sampled by soft branch. It can be inferred that around50% of the RoIs sampled by soft branch is not sampled by hard branch. (b) A quantitative analysisof true positive RoIs. There is an overlap between RoIs sampled by soft branch and hard branchalthough each branch also selects its own unique samples.
Figure 4: (a): A quantitative analysis of RoIs sampled by soft branch. It can be inferred that around50% of the RoIs sampled by soft branch is not sampled by hard branch. (b) A quantitative analysisof true positive RoIs. There is an overlap between RoIs sampled by soft branch and hard branchalthough each branch also selects its own unique samples.
