Figure 1: Examples ofCartoonX explanations.
Figure 2: The RDE mask can find low expected distortion in polar coordinates but not in Euclideancoordinates. Therefore, in this example, polar coordinates are more appropriate to explain Φ(x),and RDE would determine that the angle 夕,not the magnitude r, is relevant for Φ(χ).
Figure 3: CartoonX has many interesting parallels to wavelet-based image compression. Distortionis denoted as d, Φ is an image classifier, h denotes the discrete wavelet coefficients, T is the discretewavelet transform, and ` is the coefficient budget.
Figure 4: Left side: an image of a memorial arch dedicated to peace. Right side: visualization ofthe DWT coefficients for five scales. Three L-shaped sub-images describe coefficients for details invertical, horizontal, and diagonal orientation at a particular scale. The largest sub-images (the outerL-shape) belong to the lowest scale, i.e., the highest resolution. The smaller L-shaped sub-imagesgradually build up to higher scales, i.e., lower resolution features.
Figure 5: Each row compares CartoonX explanations of misclassifications by MobileNetV3-Smal toPixel RDE (Macdonald et al., 2019), Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), and Smooth-grad (Smilkov et al., 2017). The predicted label is depicted above each misclassified image.
Figure 6: CartoonX explanations for VGG16 compared to state-of-the-art methods, that is, PixelRDE (Macdonald et al., 2019), Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), Smoothgrad(Smilkov et al., 2017), Guided Backprop (Springenberg et al., 2015), and LRP (Bach et al., 2015).
Figure 7: We compare the sensitivity of CartoonX and Pixel RDE to the sparsity level λ. The toprow depicts CartoonX, and the bottom row depicts Pixel RDE, for increasing values of λ. Note thatfor λ = 0, Pixel RDE is entirely yellow because the mask is initialized as s = [1 . . . 1]T and λ = 0provides no incentive to make s sparser. For the same reason, CatoonX is simply the greyscaleimage for λ = 0.
Figure 8: We compare the sensitivity of CartoonX to the perturbation distribution Vs . The top imagewas classified as a fountain and the bottom image as a viaduct. The second column depicts CartoonXwith Vs as Gaussian adaptive noise, and the third column depicts CartoonX with Vs as constant zeroperturbations (zero baseline). We observe that Gaussian adaptive noise is much more interpretablethan the zero baseline.
Figure 9: We compare the sensitivity of CartoonX to four measures of distortion d(Φ(x), Φ(y)).
Figure 10: CartoonX and Pixel RDE are both performed on the image of the blue sky. However, bothmethods are adjusted here to find evidence for the output probabilities of the image of the airplaneinstead of the blue sky. Pixel RDE, unlike CartoonX, can create an artificial airplane as evidence foran airplane in the smooth blue sky.
Figure 11: Explanation artifacts in Pixel RDE. We observe that Pixel RDE tends to create edges thatare not a subset of the edges in the original input image. These edges can make prototypical artifactpatterns such as Wrinkles in the cloak (first roW), coral tentacles (second roW), or chain mail (thirdroW).
Figure 12: We compare CatoonX explanations for classifications by AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,2012), VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015), InceptionV3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), and ResNeXt50(Xie et al., 2017). Green labels mark correct classifications and red labels mark wrong classifactions.
Figure 13: Explaining misclassifications with CartoonX on Imagenet and MobileNetV3-Small.
Figure 14: Explaining misclassifications with CartoonX on Imagenet and MobileNetV3-Small.
Figure 15: Explaining misclassifications with CartoonX on Imagenet and MobileNetV3-Small.
Figure 16: Explaining misclassifications with CartoonX on Imagenet and MobileNetV3-Small.
Figure 17: Comparing CartoonX on random ImageNet samples and VGG16.
Figure 18: Comparing CartoonX on random ImageNet samples and VGG16.
Figure 19: Comparing CartoonX on random ImageNet samples and VGG16.
Figure 20: Comparing CartoonX on random ImageNet samples and VGG16.
Figure 21: Failures of CartoonX.
