Figure 1: Average number of pseudo pointsand raw LiDAR points on objects in differentdistance ranges.
Figure 2: Comparison between raw LiDARpoint clouds and pseudo point clouds.
Figure 3: Comparison between SFD and Voxel-RCNN. For the visualization of SFD and Voxel-RCNN, we use pseudo clouds and raw clouds, respectively. We show true positives in green and falsepositives in indigo. The ground-truth boxes and raw LiDAR points inside the boxes are rendered inred. Green arrows represent that our predictions are more accurate, and indigo arrows represent falsepositives of Voxel-RCNN. The figures beside BEV boxes represent the score and 3d iou.
Figure 4: SFD mainly consists of three parts: LiDAR Stream, Pseudo Stream and Sparse Dense FusionHead. (1)LiDAR Stream only uses raw clouds (generated by LiDAR) to predict 3D RoIs. ThenRoIs are used to crop raw clouds and pseudo clouds (generated from depth completion). (2)PseudoStream uses raw clouds and images to generate pseudo clouds. Painting pseudo clouds with RGB, weget the colorful pseudo clouds. Then CPFE (see Figure 7) is performed to extract rich information ofpseudo clouds in RoIs. At the end of Pseudo Stream, pseudo clouds in RoIs are voxelized, and 3Dsparse convolutions are applied. (3)In Sparse Dense Fusion Head, RoI features from raw cloudsand pseudo clouds are fused by 3D-GAF (see Figure 6), then the fused RoI features are used to predictclass confidences and bounding boxes. In addition, an auxiliary head is employed to regularize ournetwork. It can be detached at inference time.
Figure 5: Comparison between previous methods and 3D-GAF.
Figure 6: Illustration of Attentive Fusion.
Figure 7: Illustration of CPConv and CPFE.
Figure 8: Illustration of SynAugment. We perform data augmentations on raw clouds and pseudoclouds synchronously.
Figure 9: Comparison between SFD and Voxel-RCNN. For the visualization of SFD and Voxel-RCNN, we use pseudo clouds and raw clouds, respectively. We show true positives, false positivesand ground-truth boxes in green, indigo and red, respectively. The raw LiDAR points inside predictionboxes are rendered in blue. Green arrows represent that our predictions are more accurate, and indigoarrows represent false positives of Voxel-RCNN.
Figure 10: Different views of pseudo clouds on object ③ in Figure 9(b).
