Figure 1: (a) A digit classifier confounded by counting edges. (b) Attacking the model throughtampered confounders. (c) Constructing adversarial perturbations through an ensemble of tamperedconfounders, e.g., local textures, small edges, and faint shadows.
Figure 2: The proposed CiiV framework (detailed in Section 5): (a) the retinotopic augmentationthat serves as the instrumental variable; (b) the proposed causal graph; (c) the causal interventionmade by the proposed regularization that suppresses non-robust confounding effects.
Figure 3: (a) A Confounded-Toy Dataset with imagesthat are composed of causal geometries and confound-ing color blocks. The adversarial examples generated bythe model (c) w/ and (b) w/o the proposed CiiV.
Figure 4: Two common strategies to in-crease the adversarial robustness.
Figure 6: Examples of retinotopic sampling andhow it serves as the instrumental variable.
Figure 7: (a, b) Unbounded attacks on CIFAR-10 that increase the budget from 8/255 to 96/255.
Figure 8: Generated perturbations of models w/ and w/o CiiV on CIFAR-10 and mini-ImageNet.
Figure 9: (a) The causal graph of the Confounded-Toy dataset. (b) More examples of the proposedConfounded-Toy dataset. (c) More adversarial exam-ples from the baseline model and CiiV counterpart.
Figure 10: The details of the proposed causal graph for CiiV regularization and how confoundingpatterns cause the adversarial vulnerability.
Figure 11: (a) The selected 9 retinotopic centers usedto generate r in the proposed CiiV. (b) The effect ofapplying different exposure parameter ω before mul-tiplying with the retinotopic sampling mask rtion of biological visual system to differ-ent light intensities is also important, whichcontrols the amount of light absorbed bythe retina. Therefore, given the retinotopicmask r generated by g(∙), the overall retino-topic augmented image xr can thus be con-structed by xr = f(x, r) = 1/N i (r ReLU (x + εi)), where ε is the parameter of exposureintensity uniformly sampled from (-ω, ω) by N times (N and ω is set to 3 and 0.9, respectively, inour experiments), denotes element-wise multiplication after normalizing the light intensity. Thereason we introduce the function ReLU (x + εi) is to find the best exposure ratio for a dataset. Aswe can see from Figure 11 (b), the selection of exposure parameter ω can change the intensity ofanobserved image. The dark environment requires a smaller ω, so we make it as a hyper-parameter foreach dataset. We set ω to 0.9, 0.9, 0.8 for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and mini-ImageNet, respectively.
