Figure 1: Motivation illustration. (×, 4) denote two different classes, and (blue, orange) color meandifferent domains. (a) Previous DA methods tend to be dominated by those large majority clustersand neglects small minority clusters, which will biase the domain discriminator optimization, leadingto a sub-optimal adaptation accuracy. (b) Our method attempts to fully leverage both majority andminority data clusters for alignment, to enhance the domain-invariant representation learning, andthus achieving a better adaptation performance on the target set.
Figure 2: Red and green points denote source and target domain data, respectively. The darker thecolor, the better the alignment, the more possible to be mis-classified by domain discriminator.
Figure 3: 2D random point classification. Red and green points indicate the samples of class ‘0’ and‘1’, respectively (left). The solid line denotes the class decision boundary, and we use “color change”to indicate its changing trend (middle). Adaptation performance on the target set is shown on right.
Figure 4: The second toy game of inter-twinning moons. Red “+”，green “-"，and black “•" markersindicate the source positive samples (label 1), source negative samples (label 0), and target samples,respectively. (a) The solid black line is the class decision boundary. (b) We also shoW the featurealignment situations of different schemes via a principal components analysis (PCA) transformation.
Figure 5: Trend analysis of the mis-classified cases statistics for the domain discriminator in thetraining. Here, baseline is DANN (Ganin et al., 2016) with ResNet-50 as backbone.
Figure 6: Domain discriminator loss curves com-parison of baseline (DANN) and our method(DANN + DDL). Experiments are conducted onthe setting of W→A of Office31.
Figure 7:	Some examples covering different domains of datasets we used.
Figure 8:	Visualization of t-SNE distributions, where samples are from source webcam (W) andtarget amazon (A) domains of Office31.
Figure 9:	Visualization of inner feature maps, where samples are also from source webcam (W) andtarget amazon (A) domains of Office31.
