Figure 1: Visualization of the penultimate layer representations (Teacher = ResNet-50,Student = ResNet-18, Dataset = ImageNet). We folloW the same setup and proce-dure used in Muller et al. (2019) and Shen et al.(2021b). We also follow their three-classes analysis:two semantically similar classes (miniature_poodle, Standard_poodle) and one semanti-cally different class (submarine). Additional visualization can be found in the Supplementary.
Figure 2: Soft output of the LS-trained ResNet-50 teacher (α = 0.1) same as the one in Figure 1. Left:soft output at T = 1; Right: soft output at T = 2. The figures show the average of the soft outputs for1300 training Standard_Poodle samples. Index 1 is the soft output for the Standard_Poodle class,i.e. pk* (T). Index 2 and 3 are the soft outputs for the semantically similar classes miniature.Poodle andtoy_Poodle respectively, i.e. Pml(T). The rests are soft outputs of randomly-chosen semantically dissimilarclasses, i.e. ptms (T). Note that an increase of T brings ptml (T) closer to ptk* (T). Therefore, soft targetsat an increased T encourage student to learn penultimate representations closer to semantically similar classml, which are miniature_poodle and toy_Poodle in this case. Therefore, in Figure 1 Observation3, standard_Poodle activations has more overlapping with miniature.Poodle when KD of T = 2 isused. Also, ptms (T) remains negligible after T scaling, as shown in the figure. Furthermore, the figure ofT = 1(Left) suggests that even with LS probabilities of incorrect classes {ptm } are not all the same, and informationerase is not prefect in practice. Therefore, the diffusion of penultimate representations is not isotopic.
Figure 3: Visualization of the penultimate layer representations (Teacher = ResNet-50,Student = ResNet-50, Dataset = ImageNet). We follow the same setup and pro-cedure used in Muller et al. (2019) and Shen et al. (2021b). We also follow their three-classesanalysis: two semantically similar classes (miniature_poodle, Standard_poodle) and onesemantically different class (submarine). Observation 1: The use of LS on the teacher leadsto tighter clusters and erasure of logits, information as claimed by Muller et al. (2019). In ad-dition, increase in central distance between semantically similar classes (miniature_poodle,Standard_poodle) as claimed by Shen et al. (202lb) can be observed. Observation 2: Wefurther visualize the student’s representations. Increase in central distance between semanticallysimilar classes can also be observed. This confirms the transfer of this benefit from the teacher tothe student. Note that in Muller et al. (2019) and Shen et al. (2021b), student’s representations havenot been visualized. Observation 3 (Our main discovery): KD of an increased T causes sys-tematic diffusion of representations between semantically similar classes (miniature_poodle,Standard_poodle). Since the student is also a very powerful network (ResNet-50), the extent ofthis systematic diffusion is not large compared to the ResNet-18 student. We further show η analysisin Table 4 to quantitatively show this systematic diffusion. Best viewed in color.
Figure 4: Visualization of the penultimate layer representations (Teacher = ResNet-50,Student = ResNet-18, Dataset = CUB200-2011). We follow the same setup and pro-cedure used in Muller et al. (2019) and Shen et al. (2021b). We also follow their three-classesanalysis: two semantically similar classes (Loggerhead-Shrike, Great-Grey-Shrike) andone semantically different class (Black_footed_Albatross). Observation 1: The use ofLS on the teacher leads to tighter clusters and erasure of logits’ information as claimed byMuller et al. (2019). In addition, increase in central distance between semantically similar classes(Loggerhead_Shrike, Great_Grey_Shrike) as claimed by Shen et al. (2021b) can be ob-served. Observation 2: We further visualize the student’s representations. Increase in centraldistance between semantically similar classes can also be observed. This confirms the transfer ofthis benefit from the teacher to the student. Note that in Muller et al. (2019) and Shen et al. (2021b),student’s representations have not been visualized. Observation 3 (Our main discovery): KD ofan increased T causes systematic diffusion of representations between semantically similar classes(Loggerhead_Shrike, Great_Grey_Shrike). Best viewed in color.
