Figure 1: Upper panel: (a) The “crust” of a ball in 3-dimensional spaces with Euclidean distancemetric. (b) The calculated fraction of volume between crust and sphere, with respect to the dimen-sionality. (c) Distributions of the distances of data points following Gaussian distribution from theorigin (χ - distribution) in 2-dimensional (gray) and 300-dimensional (red) spaces. Lower panel:(d) Sampling points following 3D Gaussian distribution. (e) DR result of the same data points bySNE, showing the “crowding problem” as all the points are tied together without reasonable dis-tances and density. (f) DR by t-SNE, showing the false clusters generated by the t-distributionfunction. (g) DR by SpaceMAP, showing both the reasonable local fluctuation and the global den-sity.
Figure 2: EED is the direct transformation of distance Rij , e.g. distance between xi and xj , alsoexpressed by l(xi , xj ), while FD integrates EED into the similarity measure, which is used foroptimization. A much heavier tail can be observed in the low-dimensional similarity measure afterFD (bottom-right). By matching the similarity in high-dimensional (blue) and low-dimensional(orange) spaces, we intuitively show how points are moved around by the optimization process(bottom-middle).
Figure 3: (a) Illustration of a hierarchical manifold: sub-manifolds (dark blue), on which thedata points are distributed, are within the global manifold with different geometric properties, re-flecting the necessity of local-specific and hierarchical similarity functions. (b) The definition ofnear/middle/far fields and the shape of the corresponding similarity functions (high-dimensionalsimilarity kernel) of SpaceMAP. UMAP (c) glues the nearest neighbor of each point with similarity1. (d) The Gaussian similarity kernel of t-SNE.
Figure 4: Results 2D visualization by SpaceMAP compared to PCA, Laplacian eigenmaps, t-SNEand UMAP on different datasets. The detailed implementations of the datasets and the hyper-parameters are introduced in Appendix A.6.
Figure 5: 20-fold cross-validated k-NN classifier accuracy as a function of neighborhood size (k)on different datasets. From left to right: MNIST, COIL-20, RNA-seq, and multi-vendor MRI. Ingeneral, SpaceMAP outperforms UMAP in different neighborhood sizes (k), while t-SNE is com-petitive to SpaceMAP when the neighborhood size (k) is small.
Figure 6: Upper panel: Swill Roll with a hole. Lower panel: Fashion MNIST. SpaceMAP canhandle both continuous and disjoint manifolds, while Isomap, t-SNE, and UMAP are more sensitiveto the manifold properties. In particular, both t-SNE and UMAP resulted in artificial clusters, brokenat the location of the hole.
Figure 7: Visualization of the GoogleNews Word2Vec 3 million dataset by UMAP (left) andSpaceMAP (middle), where the SpaceMAP result is zoomed in for better visualization of the wordsemantics (right).
Figure 8: Embedding integers from 0 to 1,000,000, as represented by the sparse binary vectors ofprime number divisibility, as described in UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018). Sub-structures of data canbe identified, which corresponds to divisibility of multiple prime numbers (zoomed-in windows).
Figure 9: Ablation study to compare the definition of similarity functions in SpaceMAP and UMAP,on the MNIST dataset. Following the gray arrow, we adapted the P and Q from UMAP toSpaceMAP. It can be observed that our proposed multi-scale P (differentiating near field and mid-dle field) had a significant influence on the final visualization. Compared to UMAP, SpaceMAPresulted in better separation of the clusters, and less uniform intra-class distribution. We argue thatthe uniform distribution within classes, as promoted by the UMAP rationale, can be artificial as dataoften have sub-structures within a class. See Figure 13 for a zoomed-in view of MNIST handwrittendigits.
Figure 10: Ablation study to compare the definition of similarity functions in SpaceMAP andUMAP, on the Swiss-Roll-with-a-Hole dataset. Different combinations of P and Q were tested.
Figure 11: Hyper-parameter selection in SpaceMAP: the influence of nnear and nmiddle .
Figure 12: Hyper-parameter selection in SpaceMAP: the influence of η .
Figure 13: Visualizing MNIST images on SpaceMAP: the distribution of data points may not beuniform by nature. For example, a split-up of digit 2, 3 can be observed depending on the style ofwriting.
Figure 14: The original images of the cardiac cine MRI datasets as described in Section 4.1 andvisualized in the last row of Figure. 4. The images depict human heart during one cardiac cycleat different cross section levels (short-axis). The worm-like structure in t-SNE and SpaceMAPvisualization represents the spatial and temporal continuity in the image data.
