Figure 1: PoseConv3D takes 2D poses as inputs. Ingeneral, 2D poses are of better quality compared to 3Dposes. We visualize 2D poses estimated with HRNet forvideos in NTU-60 and FineGYM in (a). Apparently, theirquality is much better than 3D poses collected by sensors(b) or estimated with state-of-the-art estimators (c).
Figure 2: Our Framework. For each frame in a video, We first use a two-stage Pose estimator (detection +Pose estimation) for 2D human pose extraction. Then we stack heatmaps of joints or limbs along the temporaldimension and apply pre-processing to the generated 3D heatmap volumes. Finally, we use a 3D-CNN toclassify the 3D heatmap volumes.
Figure 3: Uniform Sampling outperforms Fix-Stride Sampling. All results are for 10-clip testing,except Uni-32[1c], which uses I-CliP testing.
Figure 4: Uniform Sampling helps in modelinglonger videos. Left: The length distribution ofNTU60-XSub val videos. Right: Uniform Samplingimproves the recognition accuracy of longer videos.
Figure 5: The extracted skeletons of the NTURGB+D dataset. The actions of the visualized frames are:“cheer up”, “touch other person’s pocket”, “jump up”, “put the palms together”, “taking a selfie”, “shake fist”.
Figure 6: The extracted skeletons of the FineGYM dataset. The extracted skeletons are far from perfect,but discriminative enough for action recognition.
Figure 7: The extracted skeletons of the Kinetics400 dataset.
Figure 8: The extracted skeletons of the Volleyball dataset.
Figure 9: The pipeline of generating the input of PoseConv3D. Left, Pose Extraction: We perform Top-Down Pose estimation for each single frame. The estimated 2D poses are saved as coordinate-triplets: (x, y,score). Right, Generating Pseudo HeatmaP Volumes: Based on the coordinate-triplets, We generate pseudoheatmaps for joints and limbs using Eq 1, 2. We perform subjects-centered cropping and uniform sampling tomake the heatmap volumes compact.
Figure 10: Problems in Kinetics400 Pose Extraction. Left:Human missing in action ‘kayaking’. Middle: Human skeletonis too small to be recognized in action ‘diving cliff’. Right: Onlyhuman parts appear, the pose estimator fails (‘washing feet’).
