Figure 1: Schematic overview of the training and exploration processes involved in the proposedGPL framework. The TD-errors play a central role and are utilized both for updating the critic andfor estimating the current bias to update the parameterized uncertainty regularizer.
Figure 2: Recorded estimated bias for ten runs of two simple extensions of the SAC algorithm.
Figure 3: Performance curves for the considered five complex environments from the OpenAI Gymsuite. We report both mean and standard deviation of the episodic returns over five random seeds.
Figure 4: Ablation study of the main components differentiating GPL-SAC from SAC-20.
Figure 5: Schematic representation of the modern model architecture used to parameterize theaction-value functions in our implementation of GPL-SAC. We make use of a single hidden residualblock where the fully-connected layers are regularized via spectral normalization.
Figure 6: Performance curves for the environments of the DeepMind Control Suite. We report bothmean and standard deviation of the episodic returns over five random seeds.
Figure 7: Analysis of the uncertainty regularizer parameter. We consider three versions of GPL-SAC with different initial values for β . We show the evolution of β throughout optimization in eachexperiment (Top). We also provide the relative performance curves for each initial setting (Bottom).
Figure 8: Performance curves showing the effects of optimizing the uncertainty regularizer withalternative strategies in GPL-SAC. We consider learning β to minimize the estimated bias end-to-endand maximize immediate returns improvements via a bandit-based optimization from prior work.
Figure 9: Performance curves showing the effects of applying pessimism annealing to GPL-SAC forthe considered OpenAI Gym tasks.
Figure 10: Performance curves showing the effects of varying the ensemble size of the critic inGPL-SAC.
Figure 11: Performance curves showing the effects of lowering the critic’s update-to-data ratio inGPL-SAC.
Figure 12: Performance curves showing the effects of employing a more expressive distributionalcritic based on quantile regression in GPL-SAC.
