Figure 1: We compare cGANs, CP-GAN and our sampling approach in a class-overlapping case. 1DGaussian examples consists of two classes of one-dimensional Gaussian mixtures with one commonmode, and each method is attempted to generate the overlapping region. For cGANs and CP-GAN,we provide an equal value of 0.5 as labels for two classes. (a) It is not obvious how cGANs obtainsamples of the class. (b) CP-GAN draws samples from the narrow region. (c) GANs with S2Msampling can draw samples of the class without sacrificing diversity.
Figure 2: (a) A dataset with single positive labels is given. (b) The regions for each class of A, B,and C overlap in the data space. (c) S2M sampling can draw samples as multi-label data with twoindex sets of intersection (I) and difference (J).
Figure 3: Experimental settings for each dataset. The corresponding classesorig are denoted in boxes.
Figure 4: Example of 2 × 16 Gaussians. Compared to the base model, our S2M Sam-pling improves the quality of the points while sampling points within various conditions(A, B, A \ B, B \ A, A ∩ B) accurately even with single positive labels (A, B).
Figure 5: Qualitative results of baselines and S2M sampling for MNIST Even and FMNIST Even.
Figure 6: Results of our S2M sampling with unconditional GANs on CIFAR-10 7to3 and CelebABMS. The first row depicts the target classmulti. Intersections and differences are denoted by plussigns and minus signs, respectively.
Figure 7: Results per MC iteration for our S2M sampling with and without GMM.
Figure 8: Qualitative results for cGAN*, ACGAN*, and CP-GAN on CIFAR-10 7to3. For cGAN*and ACGAN*, label values of 1/m are given for each classsingle in the intersection of m classsi∏gle.
Figure 9: Qualitative results of applying our S2M sampling to cGAN and CP-GAN on CIFAR-107to3.
Figure 10: Qualitative results for CGAN , ACGAN , and CP-GAN on CelebA BMS. For CGANand ACGAN*, label values of 1/m are given for each ClassSingIe in the intersection of m ClassSingle.
Figure 11: Qualitative results of applying our S2M sampling to cGAN and CP-GAN on CelebABMS. Intersections and differences are denoted by plus signs and minus signs, respectively.
