Figure 1: Contrastive Learning Through Time (CLTT). A. Infants learn about objects during ex-tended interactions with these objects. Typically, they experience different views of an object beforea different object comes into view. B. Our CLTT approach mimics the essence of such interac-tions. A certain number Nfix of object views are sampled before directing attention to anotherobject. Latent representations of successive views are made more similar. Nfix determines the rel-ative abundance of intra-object transitions vs. inter-object transitions. Importantly, CLTT does notrequire knowledge of which transitions are inter-object transitions. Both types of transitions aretreated identically during learning, making the approach fully unsupervised.
Figure 2: Data sets developed/used in our study. A. TDW data set containing common householdobjects viewed from different orientations and distances. The upper two images show the sameexample object (“hair brush”) from two perspectives. The lower two images show two other exampleobjects B. Fractal-like objects inspired by Miyashita (1988). C. Example objects from COIL-100.
Figure 3: Results for CLTT on the TDW data set. A. Comparison of Linear Least Squares (LLS)classification accuracy as a function of training epoch for the different algorithms and with Nfix = 5.
Figure 4: Results for CLTT on the COIL-100 data set. A. Comparison of LLS classification ac-curacy for the different algorithms and sampling strategies with Nfix = 30. B. Comparison theinfluence of Nfix on LLS classification accuracy under the two sampling strategies. C. Visualizationof the clustering of representations in the latent space using PacMAP, here shown for RELIC-TTwith Nfix = 30 and the random walk sampling procedure. Different colors correspond to differentobjects, but due to the large number of objects, colors have been reused multiple times. Shadedareas in panels A and B represent the standard deviation based on five individual runs.
Figure 5: Latent codes of successively viewed objects. Cosine similarity of neighboring objectsalong the timeline as seen in the latent space for different values of Nfix . Colored dashed linesand envelopes represent the mean and standard deviation of the neighbors not shown, i.e., n ≥ 10.
