Figure 1: Multimodal Dialogue State Tracking (MM-DST): We proposed to extend the traditionalDST from unimodality to multimodality. Compared to traditional DST (a), MM-DST (b) definedialogue states, consisting of slots and slots values for visual objects that are mentioned in dialogues.
Figure 2: Video-Dialogue Transformer Network(VDTN) has 4 key components: (a) Visual Per-ception and Encoder (Section 3.1) (b) Dialogue Encoder (Section 3.2) (c) Transformer Network(Section 3.3) (d1) State Decoder (Section 3.4) and (d2) Visual Decoder (Section 3.4)period. Similarly, in dialogue, we want the dialogue agent to achieve this capacity over the length ofa conversation. Therefore, we defined two temporal-based slots: sstart and send, denoting the starttime and end time of the video segment that an object can be located by each dialogue turn. In thiswork, we assume that a dialogue turn is limited to a single continuous time span, and hence, sstartand send can be defined turn-wise, identically for all objects. While this is a strong assumption, webelieve it covers a large portion of natural conversational interactions. An example of multimodaldialogue state can be seen in Figure 1b.
Figure 3: Synthetic visual objects in the CATER universeFor each of CATER videos from the extended split (Shamsian et al., 2020), we generated up to10 turns for each CATER video. In total, DVD-DST contains more than 13k dialogues, resultingin more 130k (human, system) utterance pairs and corresponding dialogue states. A comparisonof statistics of DVD-DST and prior DST benchmarks can be seen in Table 5. We observed thatDVD-DST contains a larger scale data than the related DST benchmark. Even though the number ofslots in DVD-DST is only 6, lower than prior state tracking datasets, our experiments indicate thatmost current conventional DST models perform poorly on DVD-DST.
Figure 4: Ablation results of VDTN and baselines by dialogue turn positions (x axis)Table 10: Ablation results by encoding strategies: All models are trained only with Ldst .
Figure 5: Example screenshots of CATER videos for dialogues in Table 12 (Video #002660) and 13(Video #001441). We showed example bounding boxes and their object classes in each video.
