Figure 1: The adversarially learned inference (ALI) game.
Figure 2:	Samples and reconstructions on the SVHN dataset. For the reconstructions, odd columnsare original samples from the validation set and even columns are corresponding reconstructions (e.g.,second column contains reconstructions of the first column’s validation set samples).
Figure 3:	Samples and reconstructions on the CelebA dataset. For the reconstructions, odd columnsare original samples from the validation set and even columns are corresponding reconstructions.
Figure 4:	Samples and reconstructions on the CIFAR10 dataset. For the reconstructions, odd columnsare original samples from the validation set and even columns are corresponding reconstructions.
Figure 5: Samples and reconstructions on the Tiny ImageNet dataset. For the reconstructions,odd columns are original samples from the validation set and even columns are correspondingreconstructions.
Figure 6: Latent space interpolations on the CelebA validation set. Left and right columns corre-spond to the original pairs x1 and x2, and the columns in between correspond to the decoding oflatent representations interpolated linearly from z1 to z2. Unlike other adversarial approaches likeDCGAN (Radford et al., 2015), ALI allows one to interpolate between actual data points.
Figure 7: Conditional generation sequence. We sample a single fixed latent code z . Each row has asubset of attributes that are held constant across columns. The attributes are male, attractive, youngfor row I; male, attractive, older for row II; female, attractive, young for row III; female, attractive,older for Row IV. Attributes are then varied uniformly over rows across all columns in the followingsequence: (b) black hair; (c) brown hair; (d) blond hair; (e) black hair, wavy hair; (f) blond hair,bangs; (g) blond hair, receding hairline; (h) blond hair, balding; (i) black hair, smiling; (j) black hair,smiling, mouth slightly open; (k) black hair, smiling, mouth slightly open, eyeglasses; (l) black hair,smiling, mouth slightly open, eyeglasses, wearing hat.
Figure 8: Comparison of (a) ALI, (b) GAN with an encoder learned to reconstruct latent samples (c)GAN with an encoder learned through ALI, (d) variational autoencoder (VAE) on a 2D toy dataset.
Figure 9: A Circle of Infinite Painters’ view of the ALI game.
