Figure 1: Physics Programs: We consider the space of physics programs over object-based repre-sentations under physical laws that are Markovian and translation-invariant. We consider each objectin turn and predict its future state conditioned on the past states of itself and its context objects.
Figure 2: Scenario and Models: This figure compares the NPE, the NP and the LSTM architecturesin predicting the velocity of object 3 for an example scenario [a] of two heavy balls (cyan) and twolight balls (yellow-green). Objects 2 and 4 are in object 3’s neighborhood, so object 1 is ignored.
Figure 3: Quantitative evaluation (balls): [a,b]: Prediction and generalization tasks. Top two rows:The cosine similarity and the relative error in magnitude. Bottom row: The MSE of velocity on thetest set over the course of training. Because these worlds are chaotic systems, it is not surprising thatall predictions diverge from the ground truth with time, but NPE consistently outperforms the othertwo baselines on all fronts, especially when testing on 6, 7, and 8 objects in the generalization task.
Figure 4: Visualizations: The NPE scales to complex dynamics and world configurations whilethe NP and LSTM cannot. The masses are visualized as: cyan = 25, red = 5, yellow-green = 1.
Figure 5: Quantitative evalution (walls and obstacles): The compositional state representationsimplifies the physical prediction problem to only be over local arrangements of context balls andobstacles, even when the wall geometries are more complex and varied on a macroscopic scale.
Figure 6: Error analysis on velocity and position: We summarize the error in velocity and posi-tion for each train-test variant of each experiment. Normalized velocity MSE is shown in the graycolumns (multiplying these values by the maximum velocity of 60 would give the actual velocity inpixels/timestep, where each timestep is about 0.1 seconds). The white columns show the error in Eu-clidean distance between the predicted position and the ground truth position of the ball. These havebeen normalized by the radius of the ball (60 pixels), so multiplying these values by 60 would givethe actual Euclidean distance in pixels. The NPE consistently outperforms all baselines by 0.5 to 1order of magnitude, and this is also reflected in the bottom row of Fig. 3a,b. Notice that experimentswith variable mass exhibit only slightly higher error than their constant-mass variants, even whenthe variable mass experiments contain masses that differ by a factor of 25. For the experiments withdifferent scene configurations, we do not report error for NPE-NN; the unnecessary computationalcomplexity of operating on over 30 objects, and the degradation in performance without this mask,evident from the other experiments, make the need for the neighborhood mask clear.
