Figure 1: A Story of Temporal Dependency and Domain Invariance(b) R-DANN(c) VRADAt-SNE projections for the latent representations of DNN, R-DANN, and our VRADA model. We show adaptionfrom Adult-AHRF to Child-AHRF data. Source data is represented with red circles and target data with bluecircles. From left to right, one can see that domain adaptation results in mixing the source and target domaindata distributions. We can also see a story of how encoding more temporal dependency into the latentrepresentation induces more domain-invariant representations. As models capture more underlying factors ofvariation, post domain adaptation representations gradually smoothen and become evenly dispersed, indicatingthat temporal dependency acts synergestically with domain adaptation.
Figure 2: Block diagram of VRADA. Blue lines show the inference process, qθe(zt∣x≤t, z<t). Brown linesshow the generation process, ρθg (Xt | z≤t, x<t). Red lines show the recurrence process where ht is informed byht-1, which is informed by zt-1 and xt-1. Black lines indicate classification.
Figure 3: Cell states of memory cell for R-DANN and VRADA showing temporal latent dependencies capturedby neurons of the R-DANN and VRADA for the source domain and transferred to the target domain. Each stepalong the y-axis refers to the activation of a single neuron with blue for strong inhibition and yellow for strongexcitation. Step along the x-axis refers to activation per time-step. The left shows a single example in adapting3-4 and the right for adapting 2-5.
Figure 4: Cell states of memory cell for R-DANN and VRADA showing activation for all ICD9 2-5 adaptationexamples. Here, we show temporal dependencies learned across time, feature pairs for examples in a domain.
Figure 5:	Cell states of memory cell for R-DANN and VRADA showing temporal latent dependencies capturedby neurons of the R-DANN and VRADA for the source domain and the target domain. Each step along they-axis refers to the activation of a single neuron with blue for strong inhibition and yellow for strong excitation.
Figure 6:	Cell states of memory cell for R-DANN and VRADA showing temporal latent dependencies capturedby neurons of the R-DANN and VRADA for the source domain and the target domain. Each step along they-axis refers to the activation of a single neuron with blue for strong inhibition and yellow for strong excitation.
Figure 7:	Block diagram of the R-DANN showing the number of neurons used in each layer and how the layerswere connected. This model had a capacity of about 46, 000 parameters.
