Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Classification and Disease Localization in
Histopathology Using Only Global Labels:
A Weakly-Supervised Approach
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Analysis of histopathology slides is a critical step for many diagnoses, and in
particular in oncology where it defines the gold standard. In the case of digital
histopathological analysis, highly trained pathologists must review vast whole-
slide-images of extreme digital resolution (100, 0002 pixels) across multiple zoom
levels in order to locate abnormal regions of cells, orin some cases single cells, out
of millions. The application of deep learning to this problem is hampered not only
by small sample sizes, as typical datasets contain only a few hundred samples,
but also by the generation of ground-truth localized annotations for training inter-
pretable classification and segmentation models. We propose a method for disease
localization in the context of weakly supervised learning, where only image-level
labels are available during training. Even without pixel-level annotations, we are
able to demonstrate performance comparable with models trained with strong an-
notations on the Camelyon-16 lymph node metastases detection challenge. We
accomplish this through the use of pre-trained deep convolutional networks, fea-
ture embedding, as well as learning via top instances and negative evidence, a
multiple instance learning technique from the field of semantic segmentation and
object detection.
1	Introduction
Histopathological image analysis (HIA) is a critical element of diagnosis in many areas of medicine,
and especially in oncology, where it defines the gold standard metric. Recent works have sought
to leverage modern developments in machine learning (ML) to aid pathologists in disease detection
tasks, but the majority of these techniques require localized annotation masks as training data. These
annotations are even more costly to obtain than the original diagnosis, as pathologists must spend
time to assemble pixel-by-pixel segmentation maps of diseased tissue at extreme resolution, thus
HIA datasets with annotations are very limited in size. Additionally, such localized annotations
may not be available when facing new problems in HIA, such as new disease subtybe classification,
prognosis estimation, or drug response prediction. Thus, the critical question for HIA is: can one
design a learning architecture which achieves accurate classification with no additional localized
annotation? A successful technique would be able train algorithms to assist pathologists during
analysis, and could also be used to identify previously unknown structures and regions of interest.
Indeed, while histopathology is the gold standard diagnostic in oncology, it is extremely costly,
requiring many hours of focus from pathologists to make a single diagnosis (Litjens et al., 2016;
Weaver, 2010). Additionally, as correct diagnosis for certain diseases requires pathologists to iden-
tify a few cells out of millions, these tasks are akin to “finding a needle in a haystack.” Hard numbers
on diagnostic error rates in histopathology are difficult to obtain, being dependent upon the disease
and tissue in question as well as self-reporting by pathologists of diagnostic errors. However, as
reported in the review of Santana & Ferreira (2017), false negatives in cancer diagnosis can lead
not only to catastrophic consequences for the patient, but also to incredible financial risk to the
pathologist. Any tool which can aid pathologists to focus their attention and effort to the must sus-
pect regions can help reduce false-negatives and improve patient outcomes through more accurate
diagnoses (Djuric et al., 2017). Medical researchers have looked to computer-aided diagnosis for
decades, but the lack of computational resources and data have prevented wide-spread implementa-
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
tion and usage of such tools (Gurcan et al., 2009). Since the advent of automated digital WSI capture
in the 1990s, researchers have sought approaches for easing the pathologist’s workload and improve
patient outcomes through image processing algorithms (Gurcan et al., 2009; Litjens et al., 2017).
Rather than predicting final diagnosis, many of these procedures focused instead on segmentation,
either for cell-counting, or for the detection of suspect regions in the WSI. Historical methods have
focused on the use of hand-crafted texture or morphological (Demir & Yener, 2005) features used
in conjunction with unsupervised techniques such as K-means clustering or other dimensionality
reduction techniques prior to classification via k-Nearest Neighbor or a support vector machine.
Over the past decade, fruitful developments in deep learning (LeCunn et al., 2015) have lead to an
explosion of research into the automation of image processing tasks. While the application of such
advanced ML techniques to image tasks has been successful for many consumer applications, the
adoption of such approaches within the field of medical imaging has been more gradual. However,
these techniques demonstrate remarkable promise in the field of HIA. Specifically, in digital pathol-
ogy with whole-slide-imaging (WSI) (Yagi & Gilbertson, 2005; Snead et al., 2016), highly trained
and skilled pathologists review digitally captured microscopy images from prepared and stained tis-
sue samples in order to make diagnoses. Digital WSI are massive datasets, consisting of images
captured at multiple zoom levels. At the greatest magnification levels, a WSI may have a digital res-
olution upwards of 100 thousand pixels in both dimensions. However, since localized annotations
are very difficult to obtain, datasets may only contain WSI-level diagnosis labels, falling into the
category of weakly-supervised learning.
The use of DCNNs was first proposed for HIA in CireSan et al. (2013), where the authors were able
to train a model for mitosis detection in H&E stained images. A similar technique was applied for
WSI for the detection of invasive ductal carcinoma in Cruz-Roa et al. (2014). These approaches
demonstrated the usefulness of learned features as an effective replacement for hand-crafted image
features. It is possible to train deep architectures from scratch for the classification of tile images
(Wang et al., 2016; Hou et al., 2016). However, training such DCNN architectures can be extremely
resource intensive. For this reason, many recent approaches applying DCNNs to HIA make use of
large pre-trained networks to act as rich feature extractors for tiles (Kanen et al., 2016; Kim et al.,
2016; Litjens et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2017; Song et al., 2017). Such approaches have found success as
aggregation of rich representations from pre-trained DCNNs has proven to be quite effective, even
without from-scratch training on WSI tiles.
In this paper, we propose CHOWDER1 , an approach for the interpretable prediction of general lo-
calized diseases in WSI with only weak, whole-image disease labels and without any additional
expert-produced localized annotations, i.e. per-pixel segmentation maps, of diseased areas within
the WSI. To accomplish this, we modify an existing architecture from the field of multiple instance
learning and object region detection (Durand et al., 2016) to WSI diagnosis prediction. By modify-
ing the pre-trained DCNN model (He et al., 2016), introducing an additional set of fully-connected
layers for context-aware classification from tile instances, developing a random tile sampling scheme
for efficient training over massive WSI, and enforcing a strict set of regualrizations, we are able to
demonstrate performance equivalent to the best human pathologists (Bejnordi et al., 2017). Notably,
while the approach we propose makes use of a pre-trained DCNN as a feature extractor, the en-
tire procedure is a true end-to-end classification technique, and therefore the transferred pre-trained
layers can be fine-tuned to the context of H&E WSI. We demonstrate, using only whole-slide la-
bels, performance comparable to top-10 ranked methods trained with strong, pixel-level labels on
the Camelyon-16 challenge dataset, while also producing disease segmentation that closely matches
ground-truth annotations. We also present results for diagnosis prediction on WSI obtained from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), where strong annotations are not available and diseases may
not be strongly localized within the tissue sample.
2	Learning Without Local Annotations
While approaches using localized annotations have shown promise for HIA, they fail to address the
cost associated with the acquisition of hand-labeled datasets, as in each case these methods require
access to pixel-level labels. As shown with ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), access to data drives
innovation, however for HIA hand-labeled segmentation maps are costly to produce, often subject
1Classification of HistOpathology with Weak supervision via Deep fEature aggRegation
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
to missed diseased areas, and cannot scale to the size of datasets required for truly effective deep
learning. Because of these considerations, HIA is uniquely suited to the weakly supervised learning
(WSL) setting.
Here, we define the WSL task for HIA to be the identification of suspect regions of WSI when the
training data only contains image-wide labels of diagnoses made by expert pathologists. Since WSI
are often digitally processed in small patches, or tiles, the aggregation of these tiles into groups
with a single label (e.g. “healthy”, “cancer present”) can be used within the framework of multiple
instance learning (MIL) (Dietterich et al., 1997; Amores, 2013; Xu et al., 2014). In MIL for binary
classification, one often makes the standard multi-instance (SMI) assumption: a bag is classified as
positive iff at least one instance (here, a tile) in the bag is labelled positive. The goal is to take the
bag-level labels and learn a set of instance-level rules for the classification of single instances. In
the case of HIA, learning such rules provides the ability to infer localized regions of abnormal cells
within the large-scale WSI.
In the recent work of Hou et al. (2016) for WSI classification in the WSL setting, the authors propose
an EM-based method to identify discriminative patches in high resolution images automatically
during patch-level CNN training. They also introduced a decision level fusion method for HIA,
which is more robust than max-pooling and can be thought of as a Count-based Multiple Instance
(CMI) learning method with two-level learning. While this approach was shown to be effective
in the case of glioma classification and obtains the best result, it only slightly outperforms much
simpler approaches presented in (Hou et al., 2016), but at much greater computational cost.
In the case of natural images, the WELDON and WILDCAT techniques of Durand et al. (2016) and
Durand et al. (2017), respectively, demonstrated state-of-the-art performance for object detection
and localization for WSL with image-wide labels. In the case of WELDON, the authors propose
an end-to-end trainable CNN model based on MIL learning with top instances (Li & Vasconcelos,
2015) as well as negative evidence, relaxing the SMI assumption. Specifically, in the case of se-
mantic segmentation, Li & Vasconcelos (2015) argue that a target concept might not exist just at
the subregion level, but that the proportion of positive and negative samples in a bag have a larger
effect in the determination of label assignment. This argument also holds for the case of HIA, where
pathologist diagnosis arises from a synthesis of observations across multiple resolution levels as
well as the relative abundance of diseased cells. In Sec. 2.3, we will detail our proposed approach
which makes a number of improvements on the framework of Durand et al. (2016), adapting it to
the context of large-scale WSI for HIA.
2.1	WSI Pre-Processing
Tissue Detection. As seen in Fig. 1, large regions of a WSI may contain no tissue at all, and are
therefore not useful for training and inference. To extract only tiles with content relevant to the task,
we use the same approach as Wang et al. (2016), namely, Otsu’s method (Otsu, 1979) applied to the
hue and saturation channels of the image after transformation into the HSV color space to produce
two masks which are then combined to produce the final tissue segmentation. Subsequently, only
tiles within the foreground segmentation are extracted for training and inference.
Color Normalization. According to Ciompi et al. (2017), stain normalization is an important step
in HIA since the result of the H&E staining procedure can vary greatly between any two slides.
We utilize a simple histogram equalization algorithm consisting of left-shifting RGB channels and
subsequently rescaling them to [0, 255], as proposed in Nikitenko et al. (2008). In this work, we
place a particular emphasis on the tile aggregation method rather than color normalization, so we
did not make use of more advanced color normalization algorithms, such as Khan et al. (2014).
Tiling. The tiling step is necessary in histopathology analysis. Indeed, due to the large size of the
WSI, it is computationally intractable to process the slide in its entirety. For example, on the highest
resolution zoom level, denoted as scale 0, for a fixed grid of non-overlapping tiles, a WSI may
possess more than 200,000 tiles of 224× 224 pixels. Because of the computational burden associated
with processing the set of all possible tiles, we instead turn to a uniform random sampling from the
space of possible tiles. Additionally, due to the large scale nature of WSI datasets, the computational
burden associated with sampling potentially overlapping tiles from arbitrary locations is a prohibitive
cost for batch construction during training.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Instead, we propose that all tiles from the non-overlapping grid should be processed and stored to
disk prior to training. As the tissue structure does not exhibit any strong periodicity, we find that
sampling tiles along a fixed grid without overlapping provides a reasonably representative sampling
while maximizing the total sampled area.
Given a target scale ` ∈ {0, 1, . . . , L}, we denote the number of possible tiles in WSI indexed by
i ∈{1,2,...,N} as MiT'. The number of tiles sampled for training or inference is denoted by M"
and is chosen according to
MiS' = min (MiT' , max (Mmin, 1 ∙ MT)),	⑴
where MT = N Pi MiT' is the empirical average of the number of tiles at scale ' over the entire
set of training data.
Feature Extraction. We make use of the ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) architecture trained on the
ImageNet natural image dataset. In empirical comparisons between VGG or Inception architectures,
we have found that the ResNet architecture provides features more well suited for HIA. Additionally,
the ResNet architecture is provided at a variety of depths (ResNet-101, ResNet-152). However,
we found that ResNet-50 provides the best balance between the computational burden of forward
inference and richness of representation for HIA.
In our approach, for every tile we use the values of the ResNet-50 pre-output layer, a setofP = 2048
floating point values, as the feature vector for the tile. Since the fixed input resolution for ResNet-50
is 224 × 224 pixels, we set the resolution for the tiles extracted from the WSI to the same pixel
resolution at every scale `.
2.2	Baseline method
Given a WSI, extracting tile-level features produces a bag of feature vectors which one attempts to
use for classification against the known image-wide label. The dimension of these local descriptors
is MS × P, where P is the number of features output from the pre-trained image DCNN and MS
is the number of sampled tiles. Approaches such as Bag-Of-ViSUal-words (BoVW) or VLAD (JegoU
et al., 2010) could be chosen as a baseline aggregation method to generate a single image-wide de-
scriptor of size P × 1, but would require a huge computational power given the dimensionality of the
input. Instead, we will try two common approaches for the aggregation of local features, specifically,
the MaxPool and MeanPool and subsequently apply a classifier on the aggregated features. After
applying these pooling methods over the axis of tile indices, one obtains a single feature descriptor
for the whole image. Other pooling approaches have been used in the context of HIA, including
Fisher vector encodings (Song et al., 2017) and p-norm pooling (Xu et al., 2017). However, as
the reported effect of these aggregations is quite small, we don’t consider these approaches when
constructing our baseline approach.
After aggregation, a classifier can be trained to produce the desired diagnosis labels given the global
WSI aggregated descriptor. For our baseline method, we use a logistic regression for this final
prediction layer of the model. We present a description of the baseline approach in Fig. 1.
2.3	CHOWDER Method
In experimentation, we observe that the baseline approach of the previous section works well for
diffuse disease, which is evidenced in the results of Table 1 for TCGA-Lung. Here, diffuse implies
that the number of disease-containing tiles, pertinent to the diagnosis label, are roughly proportional
to the number of tiles containing healthy tissue. However, if one applies the same approach to
different WSI datasets, such as Camelyon-16, the performance significantly degrades. In the case
of Camelyon-16, the diseased regions of most of the slides are highly localized, restricted to a
very small area within the WSI. When presented with such imbalanced bags, simple aggregation
approaches for global slide descriptors will overwhelm the features of the disease-containing tiles.
Instead, we propose an adaptation and improvement of the WELDON method (Durand et al., 2016)
designed for histopathology images analysis. As in their approach, rather than creating a global
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 1: Description of the BASELINE approach for WSI classification via aggregation of tile-level
features into global slide descriptors.
T-LE SAMPLZG
Figure 2: Description of the CHOWDER architecture (for R = 2) for WSI classification via MLP
on operating on top positive and negative instances shown for a single sample mini-batch sample.
slide descriptor by aggregating all tile features, instead a MIL approach is used that combines both
top-instances as well as negative evidence. A visual description of approach is given in Fig. 2.
Feature Embedding. First, a set of one-dimensional embeddings for the P = 2048 ResNet-50
features are calcualted via J one-dimensional convolutional layers strided across the tile index axis.
For tile t with features kt, the embedding according to kernel j is calculated as ej,t = hwj , kti.
Notably, the kernels wj have dimensionality P . This one-dimensional convolution is, in essence, a
shortcut for enforcing a fully-connected layer with tied weights across tiles, i.e. the same embedding
for every tile (Durand et al., 2016). In our experiments, we found that the use of a single embed-
ding, J = 1, is an appropriate choice for WSI datasets when the number of available slides is small
(< 1000). In this case, choosing J > 1 will decrease training error, but will increase generaliza-
tion error. Avoiding overtraining and ensuring model generality remains a major challenge for the
application of WSL to WSI datasets.
Top Instances and Negative Evidence. After feature embedding, We now have a MSi X 1 vector
of local tile-level (instance) descriptors. As in (Durand et al., 2016), these instance descriptors
are sorted by value. Of these sorted embedding values, only the top and bottom R entries are
retained, resulting in a tensor of2R × 1 entries to use for diagnosis classification. This can be easily
accomplished through a MinMax layer on the output of the one-dimensional convolution layer. The
purpose of this layer is to take not only the top instances region but also the negative evidences, that
is the region which best support the absence of the class. During training, the back-propagation runs
only through the selected tiles, positive and negative evidences. When applied to WSI, the MinMax
serves as a powerful tile selection procedure.
Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) Classifier. In the WELDON architecture, the last layer consists
of a sum applied over the 2R × 1 output from the MinMax layer. However, we find that this ap-
proach can be improved for WSI classification. We investigate the possibility of a richer interactions
between the top and bottom instances by instead using an MLP as the final classifier. In our imple-
mentation of CHOWDER, we use an MLP with two fully connected layers of 200 and 100 neurons
with sigmoid activations.
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
3	Experimental Results
3.1	Training Details
First, for pre-processing, we fix a single tile scale for all methods and datasets. We chose a fixed
zoom level of 0.5 μm∕pixel, which corresponds to ' = 0 for slides scanned at 20x magnification,
or ` = 1 slides scanned at 40x magnification. Next, since WSI datasets often only contain a few
hundred images, far from the millions images of ImageNet dataset, strong regularization required
prevent over-fitting. We applied '2-regularization of 0.5 on the convolutional feature embedding
layer and dropout on the MLP with a rate of 0.5. However, these values may not be the global
optimal, as we did not apply any hyper-parameter optimization to tune these values. To optimize the
model parameters, we use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) to minimize the binary cross-entropy loss
over 30 epochs with a mini-batch size of 10 and with learning rate of 0.001.
To reduce variance and prevent over-fitting, we trained an ensemble of E CHOWDER networks
which only differ by their initial weights. The average of the predictions made by these E networks
establishes the final prediction. Although we setE = 10 for the results presented in Table 1, we used
a larger ensemble of E = 50 with R = 5 to obtain the best possible model and compare our method
to those presented in Table 2. We also use an ensemble of E = 10 when reporting the results for
WELDON. As the training of one epoch requires about 30 seconds on our available hardware, the
total training time for the ensemble took just over twelve hours. While the ResNet-50 features were
extracted using a GPU for efficient feed-forward calculations, the CHOWDER network is trained
on CPU in order to take advantage of larger system RAM sizes, compared to on-board GPU RAM.
This allows us to store all the training tiles in memory to provide faster training compared to a GPU
due to reduced transfer overhead.
3.2	TCGA
The public Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) provides approximately 11,000 tissue slides images
of cancers of various organs2. For our first experiment, we selected 707 lung cancer WSIs
(TCGA-Lung), which were downloaded in March 2017. Subsequently, a set of new lung slides
have been added to TCGA, increasing the count of lung slides to 1,009. Along with the slides them-
selves, TCGA also provides labels representing the type of cancer present in each WSI. However,
no local segmentation annotations of cancerous tissue regions are provided. The pre-processing step
extracts 1,411,043 tiles and their corresponding representations from ResNet-50. The task of these
experiments is then to predict which type of cancer is contained in each WSI: adenocarcinoma or
squamous cell carcinoma. We evaluate the quality of the classification according to the area under
the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve generated using the raw output
predictions.
As expected in the case of diffuse disease, the advantage provided by CHOWDER is slight as com-
pared to the MeanPool baseline, as evidenced in Table 1. Additionally, as the full aggregation
techniques work quite well in this setting, the value of R does not seem to have a strong effect on
the performance of CHOWDER as it increases to R = 100. In this setting of highly homogenous
tissue content, we can expect that global aggregate descriptors are able to effectively separate the
two classes of carcinoma.
3.3	Camelyon- 1 6
For our second experiment, we use the Camelyon-16 challenge dataset3, which consists of
400 WSIs taken from sentinel lymph nodes, which are either healthy or exhibit metastases
of some form. In addition to the WSIs themselves, as well as their labeling (healthy,
contains-metastases), a segmentation mask is provided for each WSI which represents an
expert analysis on the location of metastases within the WSI. Human labeling of sentinel lymph
node slides is known to be quite tedious, as noted in Litjens et al. (2016); Weaver (2010). Teams
participating in the challenge had access to, and utilized, the ground-truth masks when training their
diagnosis prediction and tumor localization models. For our approach, we set aside the masks of
2https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/legacy-archive
3https://camelyon16.grand-challenge.org
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
metastasis locations and utilize only diagnosis labels. Furthermore, many participating teams de-
veloped a post-processing step, extracting handcrafted features from predicted metastasis maps to
improve their segmentation. No post-processing is performed for the presented CHOWDER results,
the score is computed directly from the raw output of the CHOWDER model.
The Camelyon-16 dataset is evaluated on two different axes. First, the accuracy of the predicted
label for each WSI in the test set is evaluated according to AUC. Second, the accuracy of metas-
tasis localization is evaluated by comparing model outputs to the ground-truth expert annotations
of metastasis location. This segmentation accuracy is measured according to the free ROC met-
ric (FROC), which is the curve of metastasis detection sensitivity to the average number of also
positives. As in the Camelyon challenge, we evaluate the FROC metric as the average detection
sensitivity at the average false positive rates 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8.
Competition Split Bias. We also conduct a set of experiments on Camelyon-16 using random
train-test cross-validation (CV) splits, respecting the same training set size as in the original com-
petition split. We note distinct difference in AUC between the competition split and those obtained
via random folds. This discrepancy is especially distinct for the MeanPool baseline, as reported
in Table 1. We therefore note a distinct discrepancy in the data distribution between the compe-
tition test and training splits. Notably, using the MeanPool baseline architecture, we found that
the competition train-test split can be predicted with an AUC of 0.75, however one only obtains an
AUC of 0.55 when using random splits. Because this distribution mismatch in the competition split
could produce misleading interpretations, we report 3-fold average CV results along with the results
obtained on the competition split.
Classification Performance. In Table 1, we see the classification performance of our proposed
CHOWDER method, for E = 10, as compared to both the baseline aggregation techniques, as
well as the WELDON approach. In the case of WELDON, the final MLP is not used and instead
a summing is applied to the MinMax layer. The value of R retains the same meaning in both
cases: the number of both high and low scoring tiles to pass on to the classification layers. We
test a range of values R for both WELDON and CHOWDER. We find that over all values of R,
CHOWDER provides a significant advantage over both the baseline aggregation techniques as well
as WELDON. We also note that the optimal performance can be obtained without using a large
number of discriminative tiles, i.e. R = 5.
We also present in Table 2 our performance as compared to the public Camelyon leader boards for
E = 50. In this case, we are able to obtain an effective 11th place rank, but without using any of
the ground-truth disease segmentation maps. This is a remarkable result, as the winning approach
of Wang et al. (2016) required tile-level disease labels derived from expert-provided annotations in
order to train a full 27-layer GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015) architecture for tumor prediction. We
also show the ROC curve for this result in Fig. 3. Finally, we note that CHOWDER’s performance
on this task roughly is equivalent to the best-performing human pathologist, an AUC of 0.884 as
reported by Bejnordi et al. (2017), and better than the average human pathologist performance, an
AUC of 0.810. Notably, this human-level performance is achieved without human assistance during
training, beyond the diagnosis labels themselves.
Localization Performance. Obtaining high performance in terms of whole slide classification
is well and good, but it is not worth much without an interpretable result which can be used by
pathologists to aid their diagnosis. For example, the MeanPool baseline aggregation approach
provides no information during inference from which one could derive tumor locations in the WSI:
all locality information is lost with the aggregation. With MaxPool, one at least retains some
information via the tile locations which provide each maximum aggregate feature.
For CHOWDER, we propose the use of the full set of outputs from the convolutional feature em-
bedding layer. These are then sorted and thresholded according to value τ such that tiles with an
embedded value larger than τ are classified as diseased and those with lower values are classified
as healthy. We show an example of disease localization produced by CHOWDER in Fig. 4. Here,
we see that CHOWDER is able to very accurately localize the tumorous region in the WSI even
though it has only been trained using global slide-wide labels and without any local annotations.
While some potential false detections occur outside of the tumor region, we see that the strongest
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
AUC
Method	CV	Competition		
BASELINE				
MaxPool	0.749	0.655	Method	AUC
MeanPool	0.802	0.530		
			BASELINE	
WELDON			—	
			MaxPool	0.860
R = 1	0.782	0.765	MeanPool	0.903
R = 10	0.832	0.670		
R= 100	0.809	0.600	CHOWDER	
R=300	0.761	0.573	R = 1	0.900
CHOWDER			R = 10	0.915
			R= 100	0.909
R = 1	0.809	0.821	—	
R=5	0.903	0.858		
R = 10	0.900	0.843		
R= 100	0.870	0.775		
R=300	0.837	0.652		
Table 1: Classification (AUC) results for the Camelyon-16 (left) and TCGA-Lung (right)
datasets for CHOWDER, WELDON, and the baseline approach. For Camelyon-16, we present
two scores, one for the fixed competition test split of 130 WSIs, and one for a cross-validated average
over 3 folds (CV) on the 270 training WSIs. For TCGA-Lung, we present scores as a cross-validated
average over 5 folds.
response occurs within the tumor region itself, and follows the border regions nicely. We present
further localization results in Appendix A.
We also present FROC scores for CHOWDER in Table 2 as compared to the leader board results.
Here, we obtain results comparable to the 18th rank. However, this performance is incredibly sig-
nificant as all other approaches were making use of tile-level classification in order to train their
segmentation techniques. We also show the FROC curve in Fig. 3.
4 Discussion
We have shown that using state-of-the-art techniques from MIL in computer vision, such as the top
instance and negative evidence approach of (Durand et al., 2016), one can construct an effective
technique for diagnosis prediction and disease location for WSI in histopathology without the need
Rank	Team	AUC	Rank	Team	FROC
1	HMS & MIT	0.9935	1	HMS & MIT	0.8074
2	HMS-MGH	0.9763	2	HMS-MGH	0.7600
3	HMS-MGH	0.9650	3	HMS-MGH	0.7289
4	CUHK	0.9415	4	CUHK	0.7030
9	... CUHK	0.9056	16	... Osaka University	0.3467
10	DeepCare Inc.	0.8833	17	SIT	0.3385
	CHOWDER (No Annotation)	0.8706		CHOWDER (No Annotation)	0.3103
11	Indep. DE	0.8654	18	Warwick-QU	0.3052
12	METU	0.8642	19	U. Munich (CAMP)	0.2733
32	... Sorbonne LIB	0.5561	32	... Mines Paris Tech	0.0970
Table 2: Final leader boards for Camelyon-16 competition. All competition methods had access
to the full set of strong annotations for training their models. In contrast, our proposed approach
only utilizes image-wide diagnosis levels and obtains comparable performance as top-10 methods.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 3: Performance curves for Camelyon-16 dataset for both classification and segmentation
tasks for the different tested approaches. Left: ROC curves for the classification task. Right: FROC
curves for lesion detection task.
Figure 4: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 27 of the Camelyon-16 dataset
using our proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation of
metastases shown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from white
to red according to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail of
metastases at zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, the
output of all tested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red,
with blue representing the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color were
not included when randomly selecting tiles for inference.
for expensive localized annotations produced by expert pathologists. By removing this requirement,
we hope to accelerate the production of computer-assistance tools for pathologists to greatly improve
the turn-around time in pathology labs and help surgeons and oncologists make rapid and effective
patient care decisions. This also opens the way to tackle problems where expert pathologists may
not know precisely where relevant tissue is located within the slide image, for instance for prognosis
estimation or prediction of drug response tasks. The ability of our approach to discover associated
regions of interest without prior localized annotations hence appears as a novel discovery approach
for the field of pathology. Moreover, using the suggested localization from CHOWDER, one may
considerably speed up the process of obtaining ground-truth localized annotations.
A number of improvements can be made in the CHOWDER method, especially in the production
of disease localization maps. As presented, we use the raw values from convolutional embedding
layer, which means that the resolution of the produced disease localization map is fixed to that of
the sampled tiles. However, one could also sample overlapping tiles and then use a data fusion
technique to generate a final localization map. Additionally, as a variety of annotations may be
available, CHOWDER could be extended to the case of heterogenous annotation, e.g. some slides
with expert-produced localized annotations and those with only whole-slide annotations.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
References
Jaume Amores. Multiple instance classification: Review, taxonomy and comparative study. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 201:81-105, 2013.
Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Mitko Veta, and Paul Johannes van Diest et al. Diagnostic assessment of deep
learning algorithms for detection of lymph node metastases in women with breast cancer. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 318(22):2199-2210, 2017.
Francesco Ciompi, Oscar Guessing, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Gabriel Silva de Souza, Alexi Baidoshvili,
Geert Litjens, Bram van Ginneken, Iris Nagtegaal, and Jeroen van der Laak. The importance of stain normal-
ization in colorectal tissue classification with convolutional networks. arXiv Preprint [cs.CV]:1702.05931,
2017.
Dan C. Cireyan, Alessandro Giusti, LuCa M. Gambardella, and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Mitosis detection in
breast cancer histology images with deep neural networks. In Int. Conf. on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 411-418, 2013.
Angel Cruz-Roa, Ajay BaSavanhally, Fabio Gonzalez, Hannah Gilmore, Michael Feldman, Shirdar Ganesan,
Natalie Shih, John Tomaszewski, and Anant Madabhushi. Automatic detection of invasive ductal carcinoma
in whole slide images wiht convolutional neural networks. SPIE Medical Imaging, 9041, 2014.
Cigdem Demir and BUlent Yener. Automated cancer diagnosis based on histopathological images: A systematic
survey. Rensselaer Polytechnique Institute, Tech. Rep., 2005.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 248-255, June 2009.
Thomas G. Dietterich, Richard H. Lathrop, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. Solving the multiple instance problem
with axis-parallel rectangles. Artificial Intelligence, 89(1-2):31-71, 1997.
Ugljesa Djuric, Gelareh Zadeh, Kenneth Aldape, and Phedias Diamandis. Precision histology: How deep
learning is poised to revitalize histomorphology for personalized cancer care. npj Precision Oncology, 1(1):
22, June 2017.
Thibault Durand, Nicolas Thome, and Matthieu Cord. WELDON: Weakly supervised learning of deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4743-4752,
June 2016.
Thibault Durand, Taylor Mordan, Nicolas Thome, and Matthieu Cord. WILDCAT: Weakly supervised learning
of deep ConvNets for image classification, pointwise localization and segmentation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 642-651, July 2017.
Metin N. Gurcan, Laura Boucheron, Ali Can, Anant Madabhushi, Nasir Rajpoot, and Bulent Yener. Histopath-
ological image analysis: A review. IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 2:147-171, 2009.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 770-778, June 2016.
Le Hou, Dimitris Samaras, Tahsin M. Kurc, Yi Gao, James E. Davis, and Joel H. Saltz. Patch-based convolu-
tional neural network for whole slide tissue image classification. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2424-2433, June 2016.
Herve Jegou, MatthijS Douze, Cordelia Schmid, and Patrick Perez. Aggregating local descriptors into a compact
image representation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Reconition, pp. 3304-3311, June
2010.
Hanna Kallen, Jesper Molin, Anders Heyden, Claes Lundstrom, and Kalle Astrom. Towards grading gleason
score using generically trained deep convolutional neural networks. In Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Biomedical
Imaging, pp. 1163-1167, April 2016.
Adnan Mujahid Khan, Nasir Rajpoot, Darren Treanor, and Derek Magee. A nonlinear mapping approach to
stain normalization in digital histopathology images using image-specific color deconvolution. IEEE Trans.
Biomedical Engineering, 61(6):1729-1738, 2014.
Edward Kim, Miguel Cortre-Real, and Zubair Baloch. A deep semantic mobile application for thyroid cy-
topathology. Proc. SPIE, 9789, 2016.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. ADAM: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv Preprint
[cs.LG]:1412.6980, 2014.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Yann LeCunn, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436-444, 2015.
Weixin Li and Nuno Vasconcelos. Multiple instance learning for soft bags via top instances. In Proc. IEEE
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4277-4285, June 2015.
Geert Litjens, Clara I. Sanchez, Nadya Timofeeva, Meyke Hermsen, Iris Nagtegaal, Iringo Kovacs,
Christina Hulsbergen van de Kaa, Peter Bult, Bram van Ginneken, and Jeroen van der Laak. Deep learning
as a tool for increased accuracy and efficiency of histopathological diagnosis. Scientific Reports, (6):26286,
2016.
Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Francesco Ciompi,
Mohsen Ghafoorian, Jeroen A. W. M. van der Laak, Bram van Ginneken, and Clara I. Sanchez. A sur-
vey on deep learning in medical image analysis. arXiv Preprint [cs.CV]:1702.05747, 2017.
Dennis Nikitenko, Michael A. Wirth, and Kataline Trudel. Applicability of white-balancing algorithms to
restoring faded colour slides: An empirical evaluation. Journal of Multimedia, 3(5):9-18, 2008.
N. Otsu. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, 9(1):62-66, 1979.
Monique F. Santana and Luiz Carlos L. Ferreira. Diagnostic errors in surgical pathology. Jornal Brasileiro de
Patologia e Medicina Laboratorial, 53(2):124-129, 2017.
David R J Snead, Yee-Wah Tsang, Aisha Meskiri, Peter K Kimani, Richard Crossman, Nasir M Rajpoot,
Elaine Blessing, Klaus Chen, Kishore Gopalakrishnan, Paul Matthews, Navid Momtahan, Sarah Read-Jones,
Shatrughan Sah, Emma Simmons, Bidisa Sinha, Sari Suortamo, Yen Yeo, Hesham El Daly, and Ian A Cree.
Validation of digital pathology imaging for primary histopathological diagnosis. Histopathology, 68(7):
1063-1072, 2016.
Yang Song, Ju Jia Zou, Hang Chang, and Weidong Cai. Adapting Fisher vectors for histopathology image
classification. In Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Biomedical Imaging, pp. 600-603, April 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan,
Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1-9, June 2015.
Dayong Wang, Aditya Khosla, Rishab Gargeya, Humayun Irshad, and Andrew H. Beck. Deep learning for
identifying metastatic breast cancer. arXiv Preprint [q-bio.QM]:1606.05718, 2016.
Donald L. Weaver. Pathology evaluation of sentinel lymph nodes in breast cancer: Protocol recommendations
and rationale. Modern Pathology, 23:S26-S32, 2010.
Yan Xu, Tao Mo, Qiwei Feng, Peilin Zhong, Maode Lai, and Eric I-Chao Chang. Deep learning of feature
representation with multiple instance learning for medical image analysis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 1626-1630, May 2014.
Yan Xu, Zhipeng Jia, Liang-Bo Wang, Yuqing Ai, Fang Zhang, Maode Lai, and Eric I-Chao Chang. Large scale
tissue histopathology image classification, segmentation, and visualization via deep convolutional activation
features. BMC Bioinformatics, 18(281):281, 2017.
Yukako Yagi and John R. Gilbertson. Digital imaging in pathology: The case for standardization. Journal of
Telemedicine and Telecare, 11(3):109-116, 2005.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
A Further Results
Figure 5: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 2 of the Camelyon-16 dataset using
our proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation of metastases
shown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from white to red ac-
cording to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail of metastases
at zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, the output of all
tested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red, with blue rep-
resenting the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color were not included
when randomly selecting tiles for inference.
12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 6: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 92 of the Camelyon-16 dataset
using our proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation of
metastases shown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from white
to red according to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail of
metastases at zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, the
output of all tested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red,
with blue representing the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color were
not included when randomly selecting tiles for inference.
13