Figure 1: Generative Grammar (A) Grammar symbols and (B) production rules. A board is formedby beginning with the start symbol and recursively applying production rules until only terminalsymbols (red and blue tiles) are left. Each production rule either adds a non-terminal symbol (fromfirst column to second) or a terminal symbol (from second column to third) with 0.5 probability.
Figure 2: Comparing compositional and null task distributions (A) Example compositional andnull distribution boards. Compositional boards are distinctly either chain, trees, or loops while nullboards have similar statistical properties but don’t necessarily obey the recursive rules used to gen-erate compositional boards. (B) Ising statistics across the two task distributions. Error bars are 95%non-parametric bootstrap confidence intervals across different boards of the respective distribution.
Figure 3: Human performance. (A) Humans perform better (i.e. less blue tiles) in the composi-tional vs null task distribution (p<0.0001). (B) Human performance improves over the course ofthe experiment (indicated by negative correlation between trial number and number of blue tilesrevealed), with significantly greater improvement for compositional distribution (p=0.0006). (C)Some null distribution boards Can pass as compositional - humans perform significantly better onthese than on other boards in the null distribution (p<0.0001). Agents (not shown in plot) do not dosignificantly differently on these boards (p>0.05).
Figure 4: Human and agent policies on the task. Red/blue indicate already revealed tiles whilegrayscale indicate what proportion of humans or agents (conditioned on the moves so far) revealedthat tile in the next step. In this chain example, once humans figure out that the board is a chain struc-tural form (step 5), they exhibit perfect performance by choosing tiles along the chain’s productiondirection, while agents still choose other blue tiles.
Figure 5:	Comparing human and agent performance (A) Humans do better at the compositionaltask than the null (p<0.0001), while agents do better at null (p<0.0001). (B) Humans have a highersuccess rate revealing red tiles in the second half of a trial for the compositional task (p<0.0001),agents do not. Transparent line represents individual human/agent average over trials, thick linesrepresent average over humans/agents. (C) Humans do not improve their success rates during a trialin the null task while agents do (p=0.0014).
Figure 6:	Role of spatial structure in task performance. (A) Humans outperform the neighborheuristic (negative z-score), the agent performs worse. (B) Humans outperform the convolutionagent in the compositional distribution (p<0.0001) and the convolution agent outperforms humansin the null distribution (p<0.0001). (C) The convolution agent outperforms neighbor heuristic.
Figure 7: Reward received by each of the four agents trained in this work over the course of themillion training episodes.
Figure 8: We show the differences in performance (mean number of blue tiles, so lower is better)across humans and agents for the chain, tree, loop compositional conditions and the null condition.
