Figure 1: Data examples and predictions for (a) Polygons and (b) Digits. Training with Hun-garian loss leads to plausible polygons of correct cardinality, while training with Chamfer loss failsto construct a polygon of the desired size. The reverse occurs for Digits, where the Hungarianloss leads to implausible sets. Our method performs favourably on both datasets, by not implicitlyinterpolating between data examples during training.
Figure 2: Effect of stochastic prediction Testresults on set MNIST for different values of T(Equation 6). Both energy values (left scale) andset losses (right scale) are optimal, when combin-ing stochastic and deterministic prediction steps.
Figure 3:	Subset anomaly detectionFour different outlier subset detections,marked by blue dash-dotted frames, em-phasize the ambiguity of what consti-tutes an anomaly. Inliers share at leasttwo common attributes, e.g., bald andeyeglasses, while outliers lack one orboth. Depending on the considered at-tributes, different subsets are anoma-lous.
Figure 4:	Multi-modal Polygons (a) Polygons of the same cardinality vary in a rotation anglearound the center. (b) Our method generates polygons of correct cardinality and estimates varyingrotation angles.
Figure 5:	Multi-modal Digits (a) The digits one and seven exhibit two different shapes, reflectingdifferences in writing style. (b) Our method manages to capture both modes for both digits andgenerate sets from each style respectively.
Figure 6:	Anomaly detection ablation Test re-sults on subset anomaly detection for differentvalues of T (Equation 6). Inclusion of Stochas-ticity in the prediction procedure significantly im-proves the recall performance compared to thefully deterministic case (T=0). The Fi score ishighest at T =0.8, representing the best trade-offpoint between recall and precision.
Figure 8: Subset anomaly detection positive example Two different outlier subset detectionsmarked by blue dash-dotted frames predicted by the model. While the inliers in both rows sharethe no beard attribute, (a) reflects the case where the defining feature instead consists of wearing ahat and eyeglasses. The empty subset prediction in (b) reflects a case, where the model correctlypredicts the absence of outliers.
