Figure 1: (a) Consider a four class hierarchy tree and corresponding leaf predictions obtained usinga cross-entropy baseline. The risk computation is shown beside the tree. argmax p(y|x) predictsthe class “rose”, while the argmin R(y = k|x) predicts the class “bus”. (b) Two nodes i and j andthe subtree (shaded gray) originating at their lowest common ancestor LC A(i, j).
Figure 2: (a) Trade-off between hierarchical distance@1 and the top-1 error. The mean here is takenonly over the misclassified samples. (b) Histogram of the severity of top-1 mistakes (height of theLCA). The number in the bracket is the mean mistake severity. (c) Trade-off between hierarchi-cal distance@1 and the top-1 error. The mean is taken over all the test samples (the hierarchicaldistance@1 is zero for correctly classified samples). The top and bottom row correspond to tiered-ImageNet and iNaturalist19 datasets respectively.
Figure 3: Left: Average hierarchical distance@k with varying k. Middle: Average hierarchicaldistance@5 vs top-1 error. Right: Average hierarchical distance@20 vs top-1 error.
Figure 4: Mistake distribution for all values of Softlabels across β (left) and HXE across α (right)as well baselines including cross-entropy and CRM for reference across tieredImagenet-H (top) andiNaturalist-19 (bottom).
Figure 5: Average hierarchical distance@k with varying k across different hyperparameters of Soft-labels (left) and HXE (right). We observe our selected hyperparameters (alpha=0.6) and (beta=4)perform the best among others.
Figure 6: Calibration across various levels in the hierarchy for different modelsassigned depth 0) is defined as obtaining probabilities for nodes with most depth which are at mostat level i. Their probabilities are obtained by summing up probabilities of their children nodes (level> i). We present the results in Figure 6, where we observe that overall the calibration increasesas you go up the hierarchy. The cross-entropy baseline shows a consistent decreasing trend, but theother models have aberrations where the calibration error increases going up the hierarchy, especiallythe models with high calibration errors.
