Figure 1: Spearman correlation coefficients (ρ) of the predictors of the concepts given featuresbc(x) and labels bc(y) for the 312 concepts in the test partition of the CUB-200-2011 dataset (Wahet al., 2011). 112 concepts can be predicted more accurately with the features rather than the labels.
Figure 2: (a) The ideal view of the causal relationships between the features x, concepts c, and labelsy. (b) In a more realistic setting, the unobserved confounding variable U impacts both X and c. Theshared information between X and y go through the discriminative part of the concepts d. We alsomodel the completeness of the concepts via a direct edge from the features X to the labels y. (c)When we use d(y) = E[c∣y] in place of d and c, we eliminate the confounding link U → c.
Figure 3: Correlation between the estimated concept vectors and the true discriminative conceptvectors as the number of data points grow. Notice the different ranges of the y-axes and the logarithmicscale of the x-axes.
Figure 4: The ROAR evaluation: We mask x% of the concepts that are identified by the methods asless explanatory of the labels and retrain the gθ(∙) function. We measure the change in the accuracyof predicting the labels y as we increase the masking percentage. For better comparison of the trends,we have normalized them by their first data point (x = 0%).
Figure 5: Twelve example images where the debiasing helps. A common pattern is that, the imagecontext has either prevented or misled the annotator from accurate annotation of the concepts. Fromthe left to right, the birds are ‘Brandt Cormorant’, ‘Pelagic Cormorant’, ‘Fish Crow’, ‘Fish Crow’,‘Fish Crow’, ‘Ivory Gull’, ‘Ivory Gull’, ‘Green Violetear’, ‘Green Violetear’, ‘Cape Glossy Starling’,‘Northern Waterthrush’, ‘Northern Waterthrush’.
Figure 6: Correlation between the estimated concept vectors and the true discriminative conceptvectors as the number of data points grow. Notice the different ranges of the y-axes and the logarithmicscale of the x-axes.
