Figure 1: Graphical representation ofthe linear Wasserstein embedding frame-work, where the probability distributions aremapped to the tangent space with respect toa fixed reference distribution. The figure isadapted from Kolouri et al. (2017).
Figure 2: Our proposed graph embedding framework, WEGL, combines node embedding methods with thelinear Wasserstein embedding framework described in Section 3. Given a graph Gi = (Vi , Ei), we first embedthe graph nodes into a d-dimensional Hilbert space and obtain an array of node embeddings, denoted byh(Gi) = Zi ∈ RMl×d. We then calculate the linear WaSSerStein embedding of Zi with respect to a referenceZ0, i.e., φ(Zi), to derive the final graph embedding.
Figure 3: Average wall-clock time comparison of our proposed method, WEGL with WWL (Togninalli et al.,2019) and GIN (Xu et al., 2019). WEGL and WWL were implemented on a 2.3 GHz IntelR XeonR E5-2670v3 CPU. Moreover, GIN was implemented twice, once using the aforementioned CPU and once using a 16 GBNVIDIAR TeslaR P100 GPU, with 5 hidden layers, 300 training epochs and a batch size of 16 in both cases.
Figure 4: Illustration of (a) the meaning behind γnml used in the LOT distance in equation 11, and (b) the ideaof the barycenteric projection, which provides a fixed-size representation (i.e., of size N).
Figure 5: An experiment demonstrating the capability of the linear Wasserstein embedding. (a) A simpledataset consisting of shifted and scaled noisy ring distributions {pi}iM=1, where we only observe samplesZi = [zk 〜pi]N=i1 from each distribution, together with the process of obtaining the linear WaSSerSteinembedding with respect to a reference distribution. In short, for each distributionpi, the embedding approximatesthe Monge-map (i.e., a vector field) from the reference samples Z0 to the target samples Zi by a barycentricprojection of the optimal transport plan. Adding samples in the embedding space corresponds to addingtheir vector fields, which can be used to calculate (b) the mean distribution in the embedding space, i.e.,φ-1 (Mm PM=I φ(pi)) and (c)-(d) the Euclidean geodesics in this space, i.e., φ-1 (αφ(pi) + (1 — α)φ(pj)) forα ∈ [0, 1]. As can be seen, the calculated mean is the Wasserstein barycenter of the dataset, and the Euclideangeodesics in the embedding space follow the Wasserstein geodesics in the original space.
Figure 6: ROC-AUC (%) results on ogbg-molhiv dataset, when the reference distribution is calculated byk-means (Section 4.2) on the training dataset (denoted as k-means), compared to when it is fixed to be a normaldistribution (denoted as Normal). With a p-value= 0.05, the choice of the template is statistically insignificant.
Figure 7: Comparing the performance of the linear programming (LP) solver with the Sinkhorn algorithm (onentropy regularized OT problem) on the ogbg-molhiv dataset for various regularization parameters.
