Figure 1: The synthetic network model and experimental results. (a): The synthetic neural popu-lation contains 4 independent groups. In each group, the interdependencies between 2 neurons areself-exciting and mutual-inhibitive with red arrows indicating excitation and blue arrows indicatinginhibition. (b): Four scaled (shifted) Beta densities as basis functions on the support of [0,6]. (c):The intensities and spike times of 8 neurons in the synthetic data. (d): The estimated influencefunctions of 1-st and 2-nd neurons where the estimated φιι, φ12, Φ21,Φ22 are close to the groundtruth, the other ground truth φ13...i8 and φ23...28 are not labeled since they are all zero (GT=GroundTruth). (e): The heat map of functional connectivity among neural population with ground truth(left) and estimation (right). (f): The training and test log-likelihood curve w.r.t. EM iterations. (g):The trade-off between accuracy and efficiency w.r.t. # of quadrature nodes and basis functions forsynthetic data. (h): The running time of 2D data for EM algorithm and alternatives w.r.t. the averageobservation number on each dimension (the precomputation of Φ(t) is included).
Figure 2: The real data experimental results. (a): The training spike trains extracted from real data(test spike trains in App. IV). (b): The estimated influence functions between 8-th and 9-th neurons.
Figure 1: The intensities and spike times of 8 neurons in our synthetic training dataset (left) and testdataset (right).
Figure 2: The estimated influence functions of all neurons where the estimated φ s are close to theground truth and some ground truth are not labeled since they are all zero (GT=Ground Truth).
Figure 3: The estimated influence functions of all neurons from vanilla multivariate Hawkes pro-cesses using MLE; some influence functions are not labelled since they are all zero (GT=GroundTruth).
Figure 4: The heat map of functional connectivity among neural population with ground truth (left)and estimation from vanilla multivariate Hawkes processes (right).
Figure 5: The training and test spike trains in the dataset of cat primary visual cortex areas 17.
