Figure 1: Performance of our best models trained on practical pattern formulas. The x-axis showsthe formula size. Syntactic accuracy, i.e., where the Transformer agrees with the generator aredisplayed in dark green. Instances where the Transformer deviates from the generators output butstill provides correct output are displayed in light green; incorrect predictions in orange.
Figure 2: Overview of our main experimental results: the performance of our best performing mod-els on our different datasets. The percentage of a dark green bar refers to the syntactic accuracy,the percentage of a light green bar to the semantic accuracy without the syntactic accuracy, and theincorrect predictions are visualized in orange.
Figure 3: Predictions of our best performing model, trained on LTLUnsolved254 , on 5704 specifi-cation patterns for which spot timed out (> 60s). Semantic accuracy is displayed in green; incorrecttraces in orange; syntactically invalid traces in red.
Figure 4: Syntactic and semantic accuracy of our best performing model (only trained onLTLRandom35) on LTLRandom50. Dark green is syntactically correct; light green is seman-tically correct, orange is incorrect.
Figure 5: Size distributions in the LTLPattern126 test set: on the x-axis is the size of the formulas;on the y-axis the number of formulas.
Figure 6: Size distributions in the LTLRandom35 training set: on the x-axis is the size of theformulas/traces; on the y-axis the number of formulas/traces.
Figure 8: Syntactic accuracy (blue) and semantic accuracy (red) of our best performing model,evaluated on a subset of 5K samples of LTLRandom35 per epoch.
Figure 9: Performance of our best model (only trained on LTLRandom35) on LTLRandom 50 witha standard positional encoding (top) and a tree positional encoding (bottom). The syntactic accuracyis displayed in green, the semantic accuracy in light green and the incorrect predictions in orange.
Figure 10: Self-attention of the example propositional formula b ∨ -(a ∧ d) in datasetPropRandom35 (left). Encoder-decoder-attention of the example LTL formula (bU a) ∧ (aU a)in dataset LTLRandom 35 (right).
