Figure 1: Editing a 3D model produced by our method. Because we output 3D geometry as a collectionof consistent, well-placed NURBS patches, user edits can be made in conventional CAD software bysimply moving control points. Here, we are able to refine the trunk of a car model with just a few clicks.
Figure 3: Our representation is composed of Coons patches (a) organized into a deformable template(b). We use the following templates (c, top to bottom, left to right): bottle, knife, guitar, car, airplane,coffee mug, gun, bathtub, 24-patch sphere, 54-patch sphere.
Figure 2: Summary of our templatealgorithm. Given a collection ofcuboids (a), we form a quad mesh (b),and merge faces to get a template (c).
Figure 4: An overview of our data generation and augmentation (a) and learning (b) pipelines.
Figure 5: Results on synthetic sketches. For each category, from top to bottom: input sketch, output3D model with sphere template (54 patches), output 3D model with category-specific template.
Figure 6: We convert two airplane and two guitar models to NURBS patches using Rhino 3D andcompare to our Coons patches. Corresponding Coons patches across models of the same categoryare the same color. We also show quad meshes generated using Instant Meshes (Jakob et al., 2015)and those from our patch decompositions. Singular points are in pink. Our representation is muchmore compact and hence easily editable. We produce fewer singularities and only in known places.
Figure 7: Comparisons to (Delanoy et al., 2018) using their data (a) and our data (b), to (Lun et al.,2017) (c), to AtlasNet (d), and to Pixel2Mesh (e). Our results are in blue for each comparison.
Figure 8: An ablation study of our model without normal alignment loss (a), without collisiondetection loss (b), without patch flatness loss (c), without template normal loss (d), without symmetryloss (e), as well as using 24-patch (f) and 54-patch (g) sphere templates compared to the final result (h).
Figure 9: An ablation study of our model without normal alignment loss (a), without collisiondetection loss (b), without patch flatness loss (c), without template normal loss (d), compared to thefinal result (e).
Figure 10: Airplanes from the test set.
Figure 11: Bathtubs from the test set.
Figure 12: Bottles from the test set.
Figure 13: Cars from the test set.
Figure 14: Guitars from the test set.
Figure 16: Knives from the test set.
Figure 17: Mugs from the test set.
