Figure 1: Learned energy functions: plots depict the log of the normalized energy function trained us-ing 10 inner loop iterations of (a) unrolled gradient descent (reproduced from Amos & Yarats (2019)), (b)NOVAS with the entire inner-loop graph unrolled, and (c) NOVAS without unrolling (only the last iterationon-graph). Black/white curve denotes the ground truth solution x sin(x).
Figure 2: Convergence analysis and computation time: (a). convergence (test set loss) and (b). computationtime for unrolled gradient descent (U-GD), unrolled DCEM (U-DCEM), NOVAS in unrolled mode (U-NOVAS)and without unrolling (NOVAS). In terms of speed, NOVAS offers an approximate speedup of 5x compared toU-DCEM, and if unrolled is on-par with U-GD. (c). Inference on trained models with altered inner-loopparameters: All models were trained using 10 inner loop iterations. Unrolled GD causes the energy networkto over-fit to that number (as noted in Amos & Yarats (2019)). Unrolled DCEM does not suffer from thisphenomenon, but optimization seems to be less efficient (more inner-loop iterations are required for the sameloss as NOVAS). NOVAS, in both its regular and unrolled form does not over-fit, and is the most efficient.
Figure 3: NOVAS-FBSDE neural network architecture: the NOVAS module is incorporated in the neuralnetwork to minimize the Hamiltonian over the control at each time step.
Figure 4: Cartpole: Validation of the NOVAS-FBSDE algorithm on a task that allows explicit minimizationof the Hamiltonian with respect to the control. Replacing the explicit minimization with NOVAS leads to thesame solution (compare with Fig. 6 in Pereira et al. (2019b)). (a) cart position, (b) pole angle, (c) cart velocity(d) pole angular velocity. Blue line denotes mean trajectory, shaded regions show controller’s response toinjected noise. Target states are indicated with red. Plots above show statistics over 128 test trials.
Figure 5: Portfolio Optimization: (a) Violin plots for the comparison of trading strategies in terms of thedefined loss. The FBSDE controller outperforms in probability both strategies of equal and random allocationamong traded stocks. (b) Wealth - market index difference (W - I) at the end of one year for the threeinvestment strategies. (c) Trajectory corresponding to the lowest cost (best case). (d) Trajectory correspondingto the highest cost (worst case).
