Figure 1: Motion is an important cue for object segmentation from early in development. We combine motionwith an approximate understanding of physics to discover 3D objects that are physically consistent across time.
Figure 2: POD-Net contains four modules for discovering physical objects from video. (I) An inference modelauto-regressively infers a set of candidate object masks and latents to describe each patch of an image; (II) Abackprojection model maps each mask to a 3D primitive; (III) A dynamics model captures the motion of 3Dphysical objects; and (IV) An image generative model decodes latents and masks to reconstruct the image.
Figure 3: Illustration of sub-patch decomposition for image inference. Animage is divided in a 8×8 grid, with inference is applied to each 2×2 sub-grid. To generate a global segmentation mask, object masks are sequentiallyinferred for each subpatch. Each object mask is either matched to an existingobject or used to create a new object.
Figure 5: Visualization of discovered 3D primitives in two different scenes (left and right) through time. Ourmodel is able to discover a 3D shape that is consistent with observed inputs under a perspective map. Furthermore,discovered primitive move coherently through time.
Figure 6: Plot of predicted trans-lation of 3D primitive vs groundtruth translation of 3D primitives(left) and plot of predicted scaleof 3D primitives vs ground scaleof 3D primitives (right).
Figure 7: Generalization to novel objects and colors. Top: POD-Net successfully segments individual objects,except when colors bisect an object (row 2, column 7). Bottom: Evaluation of POD-Net’s generalization with orwithout physical constancy, measured in average IoUs on segmentations and in the percentage of objects that aredetected. Including physics integrates the motion signal and generalizes better in both cases.
Figure 9: Surprise over time ina ‘Block’ scene. POD-Net hasrelatively low surprisal through-out most of the video. But whenthe occluder falls and the objectappears to ‘teleport’ across thewall, POD-Net recognizes thisabnormal shift in position andbecomes surprised.
Figure A1: Illustration of segmentation using normalized cuts. Normalized cuts often over-segments objects andsometimes misses segmentation of small objects.
Figure A2: Illustration of segmentation using crisp boundary detection. Crisp boundary detection is able tosegment large objects in a scene, but fails to accurately segment smaller objects in a scene, and sometimessegments objects to multiple small pieces.
