Figure 1: Conditional inference of CIFAR-10 images with normalizing flow trained on completedata.
Figure 2: Progression of CIFAR-10 completions over intervals of 3,000 PL-MCMC proposals.
Figure 3: Conditional inference of CelebA images with normalizing flow trained on complete data.
Figure 4: Progression of CelebA completions over intervals of 1000 PL-MCMC proposals.
Figure 5:	Conditional inference of MNIST digits with normalizing flow trained on complete data.
Figure 6:	Progression of MNIST completions over intervals of 200 PL-MCMC proposals.
Figure 7: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by choice of auxiliary density.
Figure 8: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by scale of perturbations used in their transition proposals.
Figure 9: A Metropolis-Hastings PL-MCMC proposal when inferring from observed data xO .
Figure 10: Unconditioned samples at standard variance (σ = 1.0) from CIFAR-10 model.
Figure 11: Unconditioned samples at reduced variance (σ = 0.5) from CelebA model.
Figure 12: Unconditioned samples at standard variance (σ = 1.0) from CelebA model.
Figure 13: Unconditioned samples at standard variance from MNIST model.
Figure 14: Example completions of MNIST digit training set by PL-MCMC during MC-EM trainingat missingness rates are 0.6. Initial completions are shown in the top row and completions at epoch950 are shown in the bottom row.
Figure 15: Masked digit used for sampling efficiency experiments.
Figure 16: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by choice of auxiliary density.
Figure 17: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by the scale of perturbations used in their transition proposals.
Figure 18: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. Unless otherwise stated, PL-MCMC implementations only utilize a perturbation transition kernel and only differ by the scale ofperturbations used in their transition proposalsFigure 19: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. Unless otherwise stated, PL-MCMC implementations only utilize a perturbation transition kernel and only differ by the scale ofperturbations used in their transition proposals.
Figure 19: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. Unless otherwise stated, PL-MCMC implementations only utilize a perturbation transition kernel and only differ by the scale ofperturbations used in their transition proposals.
Figure 20: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by the scale of the resampling kernel for their transition proposals.
Figure 21: Single standard deviation envelopes of estimated conditional mean per-pixel RMSE andproposal acceptance rate for conditional sampling of MNIST digit. PL-MCMC implementationsonly differ by the scale of the resampling kernel for their transition proposals.
Figure 22: Probabilities that a PL-MCMC implementation with σa = 10-3 makes proposal deci-sions that would be contradicted by an implementation with σa = ∞. “Accepted” and “Rejected”proposals refer to the decisions made by the σa = 10-3 implementation.
