Figure 1: Samples from the spirograph dataset. Two sets of four images (left and right): each setshows different transformations applied to the same generative factors of interest.
Figure 3: Downstream task performance of gradient regularized representations. (a)(b) Top-1 testaccuracy for various levels of semi-supervision (higher better). (c) Test loss on four downstreamregression tasks on Spirograph that recover the generative factors of interest (lower better). The lossis rescaled for legibility, see Table 9 for raw values. Error bars are ±1 standard error from 3 runs.
Figure 2: Conditional variance for CIFAR-10 as per Equation 6. Error bars represent±1 standard error from 3 runs.
Figure 4: Assessing representation robustness to test time distribution shift. (a) Changing the vari-ance of colour distortions; 0 is no transformation and 0.5 is the training regime. (b) Mean shiftingof the distribution of the transformation parameter h. (c) Variance shifting of the background colourdistribution. In (b)(c), 0 shift indicates the training regime. Error bars are ±1 s.e. from 3 runs.
Figure 5: The impact of feature averaging on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and Spirograph. (a)(b) Testaccuracy for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively for various values ofM. Dashed lines representevaluation with untransformed inputs. (c) Test mean square error averaged over all four tasks forSpirograph (untransformed inputs not valid here). Error bars are ±1 s.e. from 3 runs.
Figure 6: The impact of the regularization hyperparameter λ on representation learning with theSpirograph dataset. (a) Conditional variance of Equation 6. (b) The total mean square error on allfour downstream tasks. Error bars are ±1 s.e. from 3 runs. Smaller is better in both cases giving anoptimum around λ = 10-3, but with stable performance as λ is increased above this.
Figure 7: A sample from the Spirograph dataset with m = 4, b = 0.4, h = 2, σ1, (fr	fg	fb)	= (0.9 0.8	0.7),	(br	bg	bb)	= (0.3	0.4	0.5).
Figure 8: A comparison between feature averaging and augmentation ensembling using representa-tions obtained with gradient regularization on CIFAR-10. Error bars are 1 s.e. from 3 runs.
Figure 9: A comparison between feature averaging and augmentation ensembling using representa-tions obtained with SimCLR on CIFAR-10. Error bars are 1 s.e. from 3 runs.
Figure 10: The conditional variance ofEquation 6 on CIFAR-100. Error barsrepresent 1 s.e. from 3 runs.
Figure 14: Robustness of performance onCIFAR-100 under variance scaling of trans-formation parameters.
Figure 11:	Visualization of test time distortions applied to CIFAR-10 for various variance scalings.
Figure 12:	The effect of varying h on the structure of a Spirograph image.
Figure 13:	The effect of shifting the background colour distribution used for Spirograph images.
