Figure 1: Comparison of simple models de-rived when LAVEC is used instead of the MSE.
Figure 2: Comparative evaluation (6 seeds) of AVEC with SAC and PPO on PyBullet (“TaskBullet”)and MuJoCo (“Task”) tasks. X-axis: number of timesteps. Y-axis: average total reward.
Figure 3: (a,b): Comparative evaluation (6 seeds) of AVEC in sparse reward tasks. X-axis: numberof timesteps. Y-axis: average total reward. (c,d): Respectively state visitation frequency and phaseportrait of visited states of AVEC-TRPO (green) and TRPO (red) in MountainCar.
Figure 4: L2 distance to Vπ.
Figure 5: L2 distance to V π . X-axis: we run PPOand AVEC-PPO and Vt ∈ {1, 2,4,6,9}∙ 105 Westop training, use the current policy to collect 3 ∙105transitions and estimate V π .
Figure 6: Average gradient cosine-similarity.
Figure 7: Sensitivity (6 seeds) of AVEC-PPO with respect to (a,b): the bias; (c,d): the variance. X-axis:number of timesteps. Y-axis: average total reward.
Figure 8: Comparative evaluation (6 seeds) of AVEC with SAC (left) and PPO (right) on the Walker2dMuJoCo task. Lines are average performances and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
Figure 9: % Variation of the bias and variance terms in the MSE between the estimator and the trueBias2 (AVEC-PPO)一Bias2 (PPO)Bias2(PPO)# State-action pairsie5target: %Variation(Bias)and %Variation(Var)Var(AVEC-PPO)一Var(PPO)Var(PPO)X-axis: We run PPO and AVEC-PPO and for every t ∈ {1,2,4, 6, 9}∙ 105, We stop training, use thecurrent policy to interact with the environment for 3 ∙ 105 transitions, and use these transitions toestimate the true value function. Lines are average variations and shaded areas represent one standarddeviation (5 seeds).
Figure 10: Distance to the true Q-function (SAC). X-axis: We run SAC and AVEC-SAC and for everyt ∈ {1, 2,4,6,9} ∙ 105 we stop training, use the current policy to interact with the environment for3 ∙ 105 transitions, and use these transitions to estimate the true value function. Lines are averageperformances and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
Figure 11: Average cosine similarity between gradient measurements. AVEC empirically reducesthe variance compared to PPO or PPO without a baseline (PPO-nobaseline). Trajectory size used inestimation of the gradient variance: 3000 (upper row), 6000 (middle row), 9000 (lower row). Linesare average performances and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
Figure 12: Comparative evaluation of AVEC with TRPO. We run with 6 different seeds: lines areaverage performances and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
