Figure 1: A Schematic diagram of thebidirectional-inference variational au-toencoder. Samplings of latent vari-ables occur in the layers expressed ascircles.
Figure 2: (a) The training procedure of BVAE-TTS. The scissors represent to detach the signal fromthe computational graph to block the gradient signal in backpropagation. The Downsample andUpsample layers are included in even-numbered BVAE blocks. Vexp represents the expanded Vto fit the length of the top-down path input. The f (∙) represents the Straight-Through argmax withjitter, and OL represents the gradient signal. (b) BVAE Layer. The dotted arrow represents sampling.
Figure 3: Averages of pixel-by-pixel standard de-viations measured on randomly sampled 100 mel-spectrograms.
Figure 4: Examples of ablations. Each row represents (1) learned attention map, (2) reconstructedmel-spectrogram, (3) diagonally stacked predicted durations, (4) generated mel-spectrogram froma text. (1), (2) are obtained during training, and (3),(4) are obtained at inference. The red linesrepresent the section of the durations corresponding to a ‘comma’ and a ‘whitespace’ in text.
Figure 5: An example of applying jitter to ideal diagonal attention matrix AonehotPositional encoding biasing: We add positional encoding vectors with different angular speed wsto query Q and key K to introduce inductive bias of diagonal attention:Ws * PosPE(Pos,2i) = sin( 100002i∕d ),	(10)Ws *posPE(PoS,2i+1)=	(100002i∕d),	(11)where pos is the position, i is the dimension, and d is the dimension of Q and K.
Figure 6: Inference time measured on 500 sentences of LJSpeech test set.
Figure 7: Mel-spectrograms generated from the same text, “One, Two, Three.”.
Figure 8: Mel-spectrograms generated from the same text, “Hello, my friends.”.
Figure 9: Mel-spectrograms generated from the same text, “Trick or treat!”.
Figure 10: Speed controlled mel-spectrograms generated from the same text “One, Two, Three.”While AR TTS models generally suffer from the lack of controllability, BVAE-TTS can controlthe fine-grained speed of speech by multiplying a positive constant to the durations predicted bythe duration predictor. Figure 10 shows three mel-spectrograms produced by BVAE-TTS usingthe same sentence, “One, Two, Three.”. While changing the target word from “One” to “Three”,we multiply 2.0 to the durations of phonemes belonging to the target word, and multiply 0.7 tothe durations of phonemes belonging to the non-target words. In this experiment, we observe thatBVAE-TTS successfully generates speech while varying the pronouncing speed of each word in asingle sentence. Interestingly, we observe that our model intensifies the pronunciation of the targetword, showing the capability of appropriately adjusting the prosody according to the speed.
