Figure 1: A proof of a + b + c = c + a + b in LEAN and INT, with seq2seq and graph interfaces.
Figure 2: Proof success rates on problems generated with different K and L parameters. Left: Whenthe IID assumption holds, the success rate decreases as the two generation parameters K and L areincreased. Right: All agents are trained on degree-0 problems and evaluated against problems ofdegree 0, 1, and 2. We find that transformer-based agents deteriorate in performance as the testproblems become more complex than training problems. For GNN-based agents, there are no obvioustrends as to how the proof success rate changes as the degree of the initial entities is varied.
Figure 3: Proof success rates on test prob-lems generated with K and L settings. Trans-former and GNN perform well; TreeLSTM hasmediocre performance; and Bag-of-Words per-forms poorly: it cannot prove more than 5% ofproblems.
Figure 4: Proof success rates on problems generated with different parameters. Left: We keep Lthe same and vary K. The success rate is likely to decrease when the test problems have differentK from the training problems. Right: We keep K the same and vary L. For all agents, the proofsuccess rate is lower on theorems that require longer proofs.
Figure 5: The distribution of theorem length in characters for field axioms(left) and ordered-fieldaxioms(right) generated with parameters K3L3, K3L5, and K3L7. As the length of the proofis increased, so is the number of characters in the theorem, while the distribution of latter is lessconcentrated.
Figure 8: Proof success rates for field axioms(left) and ordered-field axioms(right) of GNN-basedagents trained on different K and L parameters. We keep the K the same and vary the L. The agentsconverge slower and to a lower success rate when the proof length is increased. Also, the agents onfield axioms are easier to train than those on ordered-field axioms.
Figure 9: Proof success rates on problems generated with different K and L parameters (K denotesthe cardinality of the axiom combination of a proof, L denotes the length of the proof). When the IIDassumption holds, the success rate decreases as the two generation parameters K and L are increased.
Figure 10: Proof success rates on problems generated with different K and L parameters (K denotesthe cardinality of the axiom combination of a proof, L denotes the length of the proof). Whengeneralizing to different initial conditions, there are no obvious trends as to how the proof successrate changes as the degree of the initial entities is varied.
Figure 11: Proof success rates on problems generated with different parameters ((K denotes thecardinality of the axiom combination of a proof, L denotes the length of the proof). We keepparameter L the same and vary parameter K . The success rate is likely to decrease when an agent isevaluated on problems that have different K than the problems it is trained on.
Figure 12: Proof success rates on problems generated with different parameters ((K denotes thecardinality of the axiom combination of a proof, L denotes the length of the proof). We keepparameter K the same and vary parameter L. For all agents, the proof success rate is lower ontheorems that require longer proofs. The best-performing agent for problems of a given length isusually the agent trained on problems of the same length.
