Figure 1: How different model types deal with uncertainty and chaos around the non-continuity at±π on the Acrobot “raw angles” system. The acrobot is standing up at step 18 and hesitates whetherto stay left (θ1 > 0) or go right (θ1 < 0 with a jump of 2π). Deterministic and homoscedasticmodels underestimate the uncertainty so a small one-step error leads to picking the wrong modeand huge errors down the horizon. A heteroscedastic unimodal model correctly determines the largeuncertainty but represents it as a single Gaussian so futures are not sampled from the modes. Themultimodal model correctly represents the uncertainty (two modes, each with small sigma) andleads to a reasonable posterior predictive after ten steps. The thick curve is the ground truth, thered segment is past, the black segment is future, and the orange curves are simulated futures. SeeSection 3 for the definition of the different models and Appendix F for more insight.
Figure 2: How different models handle y-interdependence. GP (and DMDN(1)) “spreads” theuncertainty in all directions, leading to non-physical predictions. DMDN(D > 1) may “tile” thenonlinear y-interdependence with smaller Gaussians, and in the limit of D → ∞ it can handley-interdependence for the price of a large number of parameters to learn. DARMDN, with itsautoregressive function learning, can put the right amount of dependent uncertainty on y2|y1, learningfor example the noiseless functional relationship between cos θ and sin θ .
Figure 3: Acrobot learning curves on the raw angles (top) and sincos (bottom) systems. Reward isbetween 0 (hanging) and 4 (standing up). Episode length is T = 200, number of epochs is N = 100with one episode per epoch. Mean reward curves are averaged across three to ten seeds and smoothedusing a running average of five epochs, plotted at the middle of the smoothing window (so the firstpoint is at step 600).
Figure 4: Ground truth and simulation of “futures” by the models trained on the sincos system. Thethick curve is the ground truth, the red segment is past, the black segment is future. System modelsstart generating futures from their posterior predictives at step 18. We show a sample of hundredtrajectories and a histogram after ten time steps (orange).
Figure 5: Ground truth and simulation of “futures” by the models trained on the raw angles system.
