Figure 1: Model Architecture. We take the second inference step (l = 2) as an example. Eachdirected edge points from a source node to its prior neighbor.% denotes nodes that have not beensampled. ali means the attention score of node vi at the lth inference step. αli,j is the attention scoreof the edge between node i and its prior neighbor j at the lth inference step. Note that all scores arequery-dependent. For simplicity, we do not show edge labels (predicates) in the figure.
Figure 2: Ablation Study. Unlike in Table 1 that reports results on the whole test set, here we filterout test quadruples that contain unseen entities. (a)-(b) We compare the model with/without the re-verse representation update in terms of raw Hits@1(%) and Hits@10(%) on ICEWS14, respectively.
Figure 3: The inference graph for the query (Catherine Ashton, Make a visit, ?, 2014-11-09) fromICEWS14. The biggest cyan node represents the object predicted by xERTE. The cyan node withthe entity Catherine Ashton and the timestamp 2014-11-09 represents the given query subject andthe query timestamp. The node size indicates the value of the node attention score. Also, the edges’color indicates the contribution score of the edge, where darkness increases as the contribution scoregoes up. The entity at an arrow’s tail, the predicate on the arrow, the entity and the timestamp at thearrow’s head build a true quadruple.
Figure 4:	The inference graph for the query (e0, p1 , ?, t3).	The entity at an ar-row’s tail, the predicate on the arrow, the entity and the timestamp at the arrow’s headbuild a true quadruple. Specifically, the true quadruples in this graph are as follows:{(e0,p1,e1,t1), (e0,p2,e1,t2), (e0,p3,e2,t2), (e0,p1,e2,t0)}. Note that t3 is posterior tot0, t1, t2.
Figure 5:	Inference step by step illustration. Node attention scores are attached to the nodes. Graynodes are removed by the pruning procedure.
Figure 6: A simple example with two inference steps for illustrating reverse node representationupdate schema. The graph is initialized with the green node. In the first step (the left figure), orangenodes are sampled; and in the second step (the right figure), blue nodes are sampled. Each directededge points from a source node to its prior neighbor.
Figure 7: Information about the respondent population.
Figure 8: The accuracy of the survey questions.
