Figure 1: HyperDynamics encodes the visual observations and a set of agent-environment interactions andgenerates the parameters of a dynamics model dedicated to the current environment and timestep using a hy-pernetwork. HyperDynamics for pushing follows the general formulation, with a visual encoder for detectingthe object in 3D and encoding its shape, and an interaction encoder for encoding a small history of interactionsof the agent with the environment.
Figure 2: We consider two typesof robots and two environmentsfor locomotion. Top: Ant-Pier.
Figure 3: Top: 24 objects used for training. Bottom: 7 objects used for testing. Objects selected from theShapeNet Dataset (Chang et al., 2015) are realistic objects seen during daily life, and objects from the MITPush dataset (Yu et al., 2016) consist of basic geometries such as rectangle, triangle, and ellipse. Note thatthe shape of the testing objects differ from those used for training. (The third mug object used for testing ishandleless.)A	Experimental DetailsA.1 Object PushingOur dataset consists of 31 object meshes with distinct shapes, including 11 objects from the MITPush dataset (Yu et al., 2016) and 20 objects selected from four categories (camera, mug, bowl andbed) in the ShapeNet Dataset (Chang et al., 2015). 24 objects are used for generating the trainingdata and 7 objects are used for testing (see Figure 3). The size of the objects ranges from 7cmto 12cm. For each pushing trajectory, we randomly sample an object with randomized mass andfriction coefficient, and place it on a 0.6m × 0.6m table surface at a uniformly sampled randomposition. At the begining of each trajectory, we instantiate the robot’s end-effector nearby the object,with a random distance from the object’s center ranging from 6cm to 10cm. When sampling pushingactions, with a probability of 0.2 the agent pushes towards a completely random direction, and witha probability of 0.8 it pushes towards a point randomly sampled in the object’s bounding box. Eachaction is a displacement with a magnitude sampled from [3cm, 6cm].
