Figure 1: Simplified discriminator optimization structure: for each time-step the four most recentobservations ot:t-3 are processed independently by the preprocessor Pθ1, outputting the correspond-ing latent representations zt:t-3. The latent representations are then concatenated and fed jointlyinto the invariant discriminator Sθ2, and fed individually into the statistics network Tφ, outputtingrespectively the GAIL objective JG, and the penalty loss Lβ or Lλ .
Figure 2: Performance curves for the Inverted Pendulum (Top) and Reacher (Bottom) realms. Dis-entanGAIL is the only algorithm consistently achieving a performance close to the ‘expert’ agent’s.
Figure 3: Performance curves for the Hopper (Top-left), Half-Cheetah (Bottom-left), 7DOF-Pusher(Top-right) and 7DOF-Striker (Bottom-right) environment realms.
Figure 4: Couplings produced by matching the observations collected in the ‘observer’ agent’senvironment with the observations collected in the ‘expert’ agent’s environment, to minimize theL1-distance between the latent representations produced by DisentanGAIL. On the right we showthe results between the agent set of visual trajectories Bπ and the set of expert demonstrations BE,and on the left we show the results between the prior set of agent observations BP.π and the priorset of expert observations BP.E. From top to bottom, we show the results in the Inverted Pendulum,Reacher, Hopper, Half-Cheetah, 7DOF-Pusher and 7DOF-Striker environment realms. We producethe couplings in six sample observational imitation problems considering domain differences interms of both environment appearance and agent embodiment.
Figure 5: Couplings produced by matching the observations collected in the ‘observer’ agent’senvironment with the observations collected in the ‘expert’ agent’s environment, to minimize theL1-distance between the latent representations produced by DisentanGAIL with domain confusionloss. This visualization is analogous to Fig. 418Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021Figure 6: Average mutual information between the latent representations Z and the default rewardsrtrue throughout performing observational imitation, for differents value of the expert demonstra-tion hyper-parameter Imax . We evaluate this measure for the experiments in the Reacher and In-verted Pendulum environment realms considering domain differences in both appearance and em-bodiment.
Figure 6: Average mutual information between the latent representations Z and the default rewardsrtrue throughout performing observational imitation, for differents value of the expert demonstra-tion hyper-parameter Imax . We evaluate this measure for the experiments in the Reacher and In-verted Pendulum environment realms considering domain differences in both appearance and em-bodiment.
Figure 7: Performance curves from enforcing tighter expert demonstration constraints in the InvertedPendulum (Top) and Reacher (Bottom) environment realms.
Figure 8: Performance curves for the domain information disguising ablation performed in the In-verted Pendulum (Top) and Reacher (Bottom) environment realms.
Figure 9: Performance curves for the Hopper (Left) and 7DOF-Pusher (Right) environment realmsin the alternative target environments.
