Figure 1: Sampling chain of shape generation. Full generation processes are included in the supple-mentary material.
Figure 2: Overview of GCA. The top shows a probabilistic shape completion sampling chain of achair starting from the partial input. Bottom figures show an illustrative figure of a single transition.
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of probabilistic Figure 4: Samples from shape generation.
Figure 5: Shape completion results when jointly trained with multiple categories of shapes. Given anambiguous input shape, features from different categories co-exist (top: lamp + table, bottom: lamp +chair) in the completed shape (left). Even though GCA is trained to complete a single object, it cancomplete a scene with multiple partial shapes of different categories (right).
Figure 7: Completing disconnected shapes.
Figure 6: Search space visualization. The graphshows the percentage of the occupied voxels(solid lines) and the searched neighborhood vox-els (dashed lines) during 100 time steps of shapegeneration process.
Figure 8: Ablation study on the effects of neighborhood radius r, infusion speed w, and time stepT (from left to right) tested with probabilistic shape completion on lamp dataset. Note that MMD(quality), TMD (diversity) and UHD (fidelity) presented in the figures are multiplied by 103, 102 and102, respectively.
Figure 9: Completion results on unseen initial states. The model is trained on chair, but the initialstate of lamp is given as input.
Figure 10: Qualitative comparison against cGAN (Wu et al. (2020)) for lamp with small partial input.
Figure 11: Figure 12: Probability heatmap of chair completion. The probability of next stateFailure case. of occupancy is presented at a horizontal cross section, immediately below theinput chair seat. We also present the current state st .
Figure 13: Architecture of U-Net. The parenthesis denotes the stride of the sparse convolution /deconvolution. Every convolution is followed by batch normalization.
Figure 14: Qualitative comparison against cGAN (Wu eton chair.
Figure 15: Qualitative comparison against cGAN (Wu et al. (2020)) of probabilistic shape completionon table.
Figure 16: Qualitative comparison against cGAN (Wu et al. (2020)) of probabilistic shape completionon lamp.
Figure 17: Samples from shape generation on airplane dataset.
Figure 18: Samples from shape generation on chair dataset.
Figure 19: Samples from shape generation on car dataset.
