Figure 1: RODE framework. (a) The forward model for learning action representations. (b) Roleselector architecture. (c) Role action spaces and role policy structure.
Figure 2: Action representations learned by our predictive model on corridor (left) and3s5z_vs_3s6z (right). Blue arrows indicate the directions moving towards enemies while red onesshow the directions moving away from enemies.
Figure 3: Performance comparison with baselines on all super hard maps and one hard map(2c_vs_64zg). In Appendix C.1, We show results on the whole benchmark.
Figure 4: The number of scenarios(out of all 14 scenarios) in which thealgorithm’s median test win % is thehighest by at least 1/32.
Figure 6: Ablation studies regarding each component of RODE. The best performance that can beachieved by QMIX is shown as horizontal dashed lines.
Figure 5: Win rates on unseen mapsof the policy learned on corridor,where 6 ally Zealots face 24 Zerglings.
Figure 7: Visualization of roles in one episode on corridor. The first row shows game snapshots.
Figure 8: Frequencies of taking each role during training on corridor. Correspond to Fig. 7. Thefrequencies of two roles which help exploration (Role 0 and Role 2) first increase and then decrease.
Figure 9: Comparisons between RODE and baselines on all super hard maps.
Figure 10: Comparisons between RODE and baselines on all hard maps.
Figure 11: Comparisons between RODE and baselines on all easy maps.
Figure 12: Influence of the role interval (the number of timesteps between two consecutive roleselections).
Figure 13: Comparisons between RODE with a recurrent role selector (RODE) and a fully-connected role selector conditioned on local observations (RODE (Fully-Connected Role Selector)).
Figure 14: RODE with different k values.
Figure 15: Comparisons between RODE using X-means clustering and RODE using k-means clus-tering, where k = 3 for maps with homogeneous enemies and k = 5 for maps with heterogeneousenemies. X-means does not require predefining the number of clusters.
Figure 16: Comparisons between RODE and RODE with shared role policies and role selector.
