Figure 1: Pipeline schematic. Participants are presented with images from the International AffectivePicture System (IAPS). EEG trajectories recorded from the same participant over multiple trials areaveraged to create ERPs. Each EEG sample consists of 256 time samples (-248-772 ms, where 0 isstimulus onset time) of stimulus-locked activity recorded from three sites as participants view eitherneutral (red) or positive (blue) IAPS images. ERP responses to positive and negative images areconcatenated and normalised between [0,1] across all channels simultaneously. The resulting “images”are used to train β-VAE or AE. A well disentangled pre-trained β-VAE model is used to train SCAN.
Figure 2: Posterior distribution of balanced classification accuracy (mean, error bars - 95% confidenceinterval) (Carrillo et al., 2014; Brodersen et al., 2010). ERP - averaged trajectories, SMPL - singlesampled EEG trials. LPP - canonical late positive potential baseline representation. LR - L2 regularisedlogistic regression (see Tbl. A2 for other baseline classifiers). Models trained on single EEG trajectories(SMPL) are tested on different single EEG trajectories in the SMPL/SMPL train/test case. Blackhorizontal line - chance accuracy, horizontal dashed lines - 95% confidence interval calculated accordingto Muller-Putz etal. (2008).
Figure 3: Reconstructions (middle six columns) by two disentangled β-VAEs pre-trained on eitherERPs or single EEG sample trajectories (SMPL), as well as an AE pre-trained on ERPs. Each modelreconstructs either single EEG trajectories (SMPL inputs) or the corresponding ERPs (ERP inputs).
Figure 4: A: Latent traversals of a pre-trained disentangled β-VAE. Each row reconstructs an ERPtrajectory as the value of each latent dimension is traversed between [-2, 2] while keeping the values ofall other latents fixed. B: Inferred distributions for each of the 10 latent dimensions of a SCAN trainedwith the β-VAE shown in A. Each subplot shows the result of SCAN inference on a set of 1-hot symbolscorresponding to all the different conditions of a single factor (e.g. M/F for Gender). Different factorshave automatically become associated with different (often single) latent dimensions. For example, thepresence (red) or absence (blue) of Axis 1 diagnosis is represented by the narrow inferred Gaussiandistributions centered around different opposite values of latent z9, while other latent dimensions aredefaulted back to the unit Gaussian prior. C: five samples from each of the two conditions associatedwith the depression factor from the SCAN shown in B, as well as corresponding ERP samples from thetraining dataset . Red - neutral responses, blue - pleasant responses from each of the three EEG sensors.
Figure 5: Precision-recall curves for balanced clas-sification accuracy of depression diagnosis calcu-lated as the average of precision and recall for L2regularised logistic regression. ERP - averagedtrajectories, SMPL - single sampled EEG trajecto-ries. LPP - canonical late positive potential baselinerepresentation. Models trained on single EEG tra-jectories (SMPL) are tested on different single EEGtrajectories in the SMPL/SMPL train/test case.
