Figure 1:	Two successiveframes of PacMan, illustrat-ing the factorization of knowl-edge. Each ghost is rep-resented by a persistent of(maintaining its location andvelocity), but all ghosts op-erate according to one oftwo schemata, depending onwhether the ghost is in a nor-mal or scared state.
Figure 2:	Proposed SCOFF model.
Figure 3:	[left panel] Single object sequences With three possible dynamics of motion. After aboutfive video frames (burn-in period), SCOFF locks into the type of motion and activates a correspondingschema to predict future states. Relative activation of the three schemata indicated by the color bar.
Figure 4:	Switching dynamics task.
Figure 5: Bouncing ball motion. Error relative to GRU baseline on 10- and 30-frame video predictionof multiple-object video sequences Predictions are based on 15 frames of ground truth. The advantageof scoff is amplified as the number of balls increases (4Balls versus 678Balls) and as predictionsrequire greater look ahead (10 versus 30 frames).
Figure 6: (a) OF (nf = 4) vs Schemata (ns = 2) activation for an example of length 8 of the addingtask. "Null" refers to the elements other than the operands on which the addition is to be performed.
Figure 7: Bouncing ball motion. Error relative to GRU baseline on 10- and 30-frame video predictionof multiple-object video sequences Predictions are based on 15 frames of ground truth.
Figure 8: Rollout for 4Balls. In all cases, the first 10 frames of ground truth are fed in (last 6 shown)and then the system is rolled out for the next 30 time steps. In the predictions, the transparent blueshows the ground truth, overlaid to help guide the eye.
Figure 9: Rollout for Curtain. In all cases, the first 10 frames of ground truth are fed in (last 6shown) and then the system is rolled out for the next 30 time steps. In the predictions, the transparentblue shows the ground truth, overlaid to help guide the eye.
Figure 10: Rollout for 678Balls. In all cases, the first 10 frames of ground truth are fed in (last 6shown) and then the system is rolled out for the next 30 time steps. In the predictions, the transparentblue shows the ground truth, overlaid to help guide the eye.
Figure 11: Rollout for Colored 4Balls. In all cases, the first 10 frames of ground truth are fed in(last 6 shown) and then the system is rolled out for the next 25 time steps.
Figure 12: Rollout for Colored 678Balls. In all cases, the first 10 frames of ground truth are fed in(last 6 shown) and then the system is rolled out for the next 25 time steps.
Figure 13: BabyAI-GotoObjMaze Trajectory In this environment, the agent is expected to navigatea 3x3 maze of 6x6 rooms, randomly inter-connected by doors to find an object like "key". Here weuse only one object file, but different number of schemata (4 in this example). If we look at the objectfiles (vs) schemata affinity, schema 1 is activated while close to or opening doors while schema 4 istriggered when the "key" is in the agent’s view.
Figure 14: Switching dynamics task. An example ground truth trajectory, where the ball oscillateshorizontally and switches to vertical oscillations after few steps indicated by the red box. The bottomleft has two bulb indicators corresponding to the two dynamics.
Figure 15: Switching dynamics task. l = 0 denotes horizontal oscillations and l = 1 denotesvertical oscillations. We can clearly observe that the dynamics are being factorised into separateschemata. Schemata one is being used for vertical oscillations and schemata two for horizontaloscillations.
Figure 16: The core SCOFF module for a single recurrent step using GRU independent dynamics.
