Figure 1: Manipulating label character-istics for “hair color” and “smile”.
Figure 2: CCVAE graphical model.
Figure 3: Continuous interventions through traversal of zc. From left to right, a) DIVA pale skin andyoung; b) CCVAE pale skin and young; c) CCVAE smiling and necktie; d) CCVAE Pleural Effusion and Cardiomegaly.
Figure 5:	Variance in reconstructions when intervening on a single label.
Figure 6:	Characteristic swap, where the characteristics of the first image (blond hair, smiling,heavy makeup, female, no necktie, no glasses etc.) are transfered to the unlabeled char-acteristics of the second (red background etc.).
Figure 7: Characteristic swaps. Characteristics (smiling, brown hair, skin tone, etc) of the left image should be preserved along the row while background information should be preserved along the column.
Figure 8: Gradient norms of classifier.
Figure 9: Left: Generative model for DIVA, Right: Inference model where dashed line indicates auxiliary classifier.
Figure 10: Confusion matrices for CCVAE for (from top left clockwise) f = 0.004, 0.06, 0.2, 1.0
Figure 11: CCVAE. From left to right: original, reconstruction, then interventions from switching on the following labels: arched eyebrows, bags under eyes, bangs, black hair, blond hair, brown hair, bushy eyebrows, chubby, eyeglasses, heavy makeup, male, no beard, pale skin, receding hairline, smiling, wavy hair, wearing necktie, young.
Figure 12: Confusion matrices for M2 for (from top left clockwise) f = 0.004, 0.06, 0.2, 1.0
Figure 13:	M2. From left to right: original, reconstruction, then interventions from switching on the following labels: arched eyebrows, bags under eyes, bangs, black hair, blond hair, brown hair, bushy eyebrows, chubby, eyeglasses, heavy makeup, male, no beard, pale skin, receding hairline, smiling, wavy hair, wearing necktie, young.
Figure 14:	Confusion matrices for DIVA for (from top left clockwise) f = 0.004, 0.06, 0.2, 1.0
Figure 15: DIVA. From left to right: original, reconstruction, then interventions from switching on the following labels: arched eyebrows, bags under eyes, bangs, black hair, blond hair, brown hair, bushy eyebrows, chubby, eyeglasses, heavy makeup, male, no beard, pale skin, receding hairline, smiling, wavy hair, wearing necktie, young.
Figure 16: Confusion matrices for MVAE for (from top left clockwise) f = 0.004, 0.06, 0.2, 1.0
Figure 17: MVAE. From left to right: original, reconstruction, then interventions from switching on the following labels: arched eyebrows, bags under eyes, bangs, black hair, blond hair, brown hair, bushy eyebrows, chubby, eyeglasses, heavy makeup, male, no beard, pale skin, receding hairline, smiling, wavy hair, wearing necktie, young.
Figure 18: Various latent traversals for CCVAE.
Figure 19: Various latent traversals for DIVA.
Figure 20: CCVAE, variance in reconstructions when intervening on a single label.
Figure 21: CCVAE latent traversals for MNIST and FashionMNIST.
Figure 22: CCVAE conditional generations with z\c fixed. Here we can see that CCVAE is able to introduce diversity whilst preserving the “style” of the digit, e.g. pen width and tilt.
Figure 23: M2 conditional generations. Here we can see that M2 is unable to introduce diversity without altering the “style” of the digit, e.g. pen width and tilt.
Figure 24: Left: CCVAE, right: M2. As with other approaches, we can also perform wholesale interventions on each class whilst preserving the style.