Figure 1: 3-way, K(tr) -shot task generation with K(val) images for validation by a pre-trained GANgenerator G . a) Sample 3 random vectors. b) Generate new vectors by one of the proposed in-classsampling strategies. c) Generate images from all of the latent vectors and put them into train andvalidation set to construct a task. The images in this figure have been generated by our algorithm.
Figure 2: 3-way, K(tr)-shot task generation by VAE on Omniglot dataset with K(val) images forvalidation set of each task. a) Sample 3 images from dataset. b) Encode the images into latent spaceand check if they are distanced. c) Use proposed in-class sampling techniques to generate new latentvectors. d) Generate images from the latent vectors and put them alongside with sampled imagesfrom step a into train and validation set to construct a task.
Figure 3: Latent space representation visualization of proposed strategies for generating in-classcandidates. Left: LASIUM-N, adding random noise to the sample vector. Middle: LASIUM-RO,interpolate with random out-of-class samples. Right: LASIUM-OC, interpolate with other classes’samples.
Figure 4: Meta-training tasks for Mini-ImageNet constructed by LASIUM-N with σ2 = 1.0Table 4: Results on Mini-Imagenet benchmark for 5-way, K(tr) -shot tasks with K (val) = 15. Theresults are averaged over 1000 downstream tasks and ± indicates 95% confidence interval. The topthree unsupervised results are reported in bold. The baselines are from Hsu et al. (2019) section4.1. Note that the BigBiGAN is trained on the unlabeled Imagenet dataset which is larger thanMini-ImageNet training set that used by Hsu et al. (2019) for training.
Figure 5: The impact of GAN training on LASIUM accuracy. The blue line shows test accuracy after1000 iterations of LASIUM-N training with a 95% confidence interval on 1000 one-shot tasks withK(val) = 15. The images generated by GAN are shown at epochs 0, 10, 30, 50, 100, 200, 300, 400,and 500. All of the images are generated from the same latent vector. The red line shows the trainingfrom scratch baseline.
Figure 6: Meta-training tasks for Fungi constructed by LASIUM-N with σ2 = 0.25Table 10: Accuracy of 5-way 1-shot learning on the Fungi dataset (part of the proposed Meta-datasetby Triantafillou et al. (2020)). For each system we indicate the dataset on which the meta-trainingphase was performed. The results for supervised first-order MAML are from Triantafillou et al.
