Figure 1: Performing SCA to exploit cloud computing platforms.
Figure 2: The proposed generative framework for recovering private images from side channel traces.
Figure 3: Qualitative evaluation results of three datasets in terms of three different side channels. Correspond-ing reference images (i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the rightmost column for comparison.
Figure 4: Facial attribute evaluation in terms of cache side channels. Confusion matrices (with row-wisenormalization) compare the age and gender classification results on our recovered images and those obtainedfrom reference inputs. We also report the age and gender distributions in the training set for the reference.
Figure 5: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 6: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 7: Evaluation results of KTH dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 8: Evaluation results of KTH dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 9: Evaluation results of LSUN dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 10: Evaluation results of LSUN dataset in terms of three different side channels. The reference images(i.e., private user inputs) are presented on the right most column for the reference.
Figure 11:	Facial attribute evaluation in terms of cache side channels. Images are generated using VAE-LP &GAN modules. Confusion matrices (with row-wise normalization) compare the age and gender classificationresults on our recovered images and those obtained from reference inputs. We also report age and genderdistribution in the dataset for comparison. We have already reported these results in Fig. 4.
Figure 12:	Facial attribute evaluation in terms of cache side channels. Images are generated using the VAE-LPmodule. Confusion matrices (with row-wise normalization) compare the age and gender classification resultson our recovered images and those obtained from reference inputs. The age and gender distributions in thedataset have been given in Fig. 11.
Figure 13:	Facial attribute evaluation in terms of page table side channels. We present evaluation results byusing images reconstructed using only VAE-LP module, and images reconstructed using VAE-LP & GAN.
Figure 14:	Facial attribute evaluation in terms of memory read/write access pattern side channels. We presentevaluation results by using images reconstructed using only VAE-LP module, and images reconstructed usingVAE-LP & GAN. Confusion matrices (with row-wise normalization) compare the age and gender classificationresults on our recovered images and those obtained from reference inputs. The age and gender distribution inthe dataset have been given in Fig. 11.
Figure 15: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of the cache side channels.
Figure 16: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of the cache side channels.
Figure 17: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of the cache side channels.
Figure 18: Evaluation results of mini-Imagenet dataset when attacking libjpeg with cache side channels.
Figure 19: Evaluation results of mini-Imagenet dataset when attacking libjpeg with cache side channels.
Figure 20: Evaluation results of mini-Imagenet dataset when attacking libjpeg with cache side channels.
Figure 21: Classification accuracy across 100 binary classifiers.
Figure 22: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of cache side channels and three different noisesetting. We also present the synthesized images with no noise for the reference. User input images are presentedon the first row for the reference.
Figure 23: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of cache side channels and three different randomzero replacement setting. We also present the synthesized images with no zero replacement (x = 0) for thereference. User input images are presented on the first row for the reference.
Figure 24: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of cache side channels and three different shiftingsetting. We also present the synthesized images with no shifting (x = 0) for the reference. User input imagesare presented on the first row for the reference.
Figure 25: Evaluation results of CelebA dataset in terms of cache side channels and different settings. Userinput images are presented on the first row for the reference. Images synthesized by our presented frameworkare presented on the second row.
Figure 26: Calculating gradient using backward propagation.
Figure 27:	Mapping “informative” side channel data points back to functions in libjpeg.
Figure 28:	Part of the logged side channel trace and informative side channel data points marked inred.
Figure 29:	Isolated functions in libjpeg that contribute to the reconstruction of user private im-ages.
