Figure 1: The reversed ROC. The leftmost column shows an example of the score distributions offour data points: the distribution of scores of incorrect classes (red), and the score of the correctclass (green). The yellow shaded area is the CDF of the incorrect scores distribution evaluated at thecorrect score, that is Cx . The second column shows the corresponding rTPR (green, top) and rFPR(red, bottom). The third column depicts the resulting rROCx curves. The rightmost plot presents theaverage rROC over the four data points (solid grey); as the number of averaged data points grows,the rROC curve becomes smoother (dotted blue).
Figure 2: Simulation results. For each scenario we show a boxplot representing the RMSE valuesobtained over 50 repetitions using CleaneX (left box, orange), regression based method (middle box,blue) and KDE (right box, purple). The boxes extend from the lower to the upper quartile values,with a line at the median; whiskers show values at a distance ofat most 1.5 IQR (interquartile range)from the lower and the upper quartiles; outliers are omitted from the figure for clarity. For k1 = 500the KDE based method always achieves RMSE values higher than 0.05 and is therefore not shown.
Figure 3: Experimental results. A, B, C: accuracy curves of the three datasets as predicted byCleaneX, regression and KDE, respectively; dotted vertical lines denote k1, grey curves correspondto AkI at each repetition, black curves correspond to Ek [A] for 2 ≤ k ≤ k2; average RMSE is takenover all 50 repetitions. D: distribution of RMSE values over the 50 repetitions. E: distribution of theratio between RMSE values of competing methods and CleaneX - values above 1 (orange dottedline) indicate that CleaneX outperforms the competing methods (charts capped at 4). In D and E,boxes show lower quartile, higher quartile and median; whiskers show values at 1.5 IQR from box;outliers are omitted from the figure for clarity.
Figure 6: Additional simulation results. For each scenario We shoW a boxplot representing theRMSE values obtained over 50 repetitions using CleaneX (left box, orange), regression basedmethod (middle box, blue) and KDE (right box, purple). The boxplots for the KDE method arenot shoWn When all obtained RMSE values are higher than 0.07. The boxes extend from the loWerto the upper quartile values, With a line at the median; Whiskers shoW values at a distance of at most1.5 IQR (interquartile range) from the loWer and the upper quartiles; outliers are omitted from thefigure for clarity.
