Table 1: Prunability is highly predictive of generalization. Comparison of generalization mea-sures’ correlation with test performance on a set of convolutional networks trained on CIFAR-10.
Table 2: Prunability achieves a stronger granulated rank correlation than measures basedon random perturbation robustness or norms. Columns labeled with hyperparameters (width,dropout rate, etc.) indicate Kendall τ if we only vary this hyperparameter. The last two columnsare the Overall Kendall’s τ and the Granulated Kendall’s coefficient ψ, which is the average of theper-hyperparameter columns. Higher values are better across all columns5.4.2	Double DescentIn addition to our experiments on the DEMOGEN data set, we also evaluate prunability on a set ofmodels that exhibit a test loss double descent (Nakkiran et al., 2020). This phenomenon is particu-larly interesting for the study of generalization measures, since many measures that aim to capturea model’s complexity grow monotonically as we increase a network’s width and thus do not dis-play a double descent. We are thus including this experiment to evaluate whether prunability alsosuccumbs to this phenomenon. We use the experimental setup proposed by Maddox et al. (2020),and compare our new measure to their curvature-based generalization measure which also aims tocapture double descent. Note that up to now we studied the generalization gap in terms of the 0 - 1loss. In this section, however, we focus on another aspect of generalization and study the relationbetween prunability and models’ cross-entropy test loss.
Table 3: Prunability is similar to Random Perturbation Robustness. The conditional mutualinformation (CMI) between prunability and random perturbation robustness.
Table 4: A NiN blockA.2 Generalization MeasuresAdditional generalization measures we consider are:•	Mbest_margins_Variabie： To account for the fact that the normalized margins variable is based ona large number of input variables, we select the single independent variable that has thelargest standardized coefficient in the Normalized Margins model and directly use it as ageneralization measure.
