Table 1: Top 1 classification accuracy as a proxy to representation learning (Deep InfoMax withoutprior matching) performance with different MI estimators.
Table 2: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables trained on 160K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 3: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 160Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 4: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables trained on 80K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 5: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 80Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 6: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables trained on 32K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 7: MI estimation between 20-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 32Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 8: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables trained on 160K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 9: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 160Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 10: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables trained on 80K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 11: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 80Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 12: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables trained on 32K data samples. The estima-tion error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 13: MI estimation between 50-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 32Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 14: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables trained on 160K data samples. Theestimation error (I (x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 15: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on160K data samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of theestimates are reported.
Table 16: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables trained on 80K data samples. Theestimation error (I (x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 17: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 80Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
Table 18: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables trained on 32K data samples. Theestimation error (I (x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimates are reported.
Table 19: MI estimation between 100-d Gaussian variables with cubic transformation trained on 32Kdata samples. The estimation error (I(x, y) - I(x, y)) and the standard deviation of the estimatesare reported.
