Table 1: PEHE-10 performance (with standard error) using ICMS on top of existing UDA meth-ods. ICMS() means that the was used as the validation risk vr in the ICMS. For example,ICMS(DEV(?)) represents DEV(?) selection used as the validation risk vr in the ICMS. The ?indicates the method used to approximate the validation error on the source dataset. Our method (inbold) improves over each selection method over all models and source risk scores (Src.).
Table 2: Hyperparameters used for GANITE. s represents the number of input features.
Table 3: Hyperparameters used for CFR and TAR.
Table 4: Hyperparameters used for SITE.
Table 5: Inversion count using ICMS on top of existing UDA methods. ICMS() means that thewas used as the validation risk vr in the ICMS. For example, ICMS(DEV(?)) represents DEV(?)selection used as the validation risk vr in the ICMS. The ? indicates the method used to approximatethe validation error on the source dataset. Our method (in bold) improves over each selection methodover all models and source risk scores (Src.).
Table 6: Additional PEHE-10 (with standard error)results for BART and Causal Forest using DEVand IF as validation risk.
Table 7: Additional PEHE-10 (with standard error)results for Rojas-Carulla et al. (2018) (R.C. (2018))and Magliacane et al. (2018) (Mag. (2018)) perfor-mance (with standard error) using DEV and IF asvalidation risk.
Table 8: Results on IHDP, prostate cancer, and TWINS datasets. IF validation is used to compute thesource risk. We report the PEHE-10 test error (with standard error) of various selections methods onITE models. Our method (in bold) improves in terms of PEHE-10 over all methods and ITE models.
Table 9: Results on predicting the outcome of prostate cancer given a treatment from models trainedon the Prostate Cancer UK (PCUK) dataset and tested on the SEER dataset (United States). IFvalidation is used to compute the source risk. Here We show the factual error (of the top 10% ofselected models) in terms of MSE of various selections methods on ITE models. Our method (inbold) improves in terms of test error over all methods and ITE models. The standard error is shownin parentheses.
Table 10: Comparison of key features of urban and rural COVID-19 patients in the data set.
