Table 1: Accuracy and robustness results of natural training baselines as well as our methods onCIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The “Avg” column reports the averaged robustness results for eachmethods under different attacks of all the radii. “Natural” denotes ResNet with natural training;“damp" and "λ-damp"represent In-ResNet and λ-In-ResNet in Yang et al. (2020), respectively.
Table 2: Accuracy and robustness results of baselines as well as our methods with PGD trainingon the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 benchmarks. The “Avg” column reports the averaged robustnessresults for each methods under different attacks of allthe radii. “PGD + damp" and "pGd + λ-damp”represent In-ResNet and λ-In-ResNet in Yang et al. (2020) with adversarial training, respectively.
Table 3: Accuracy and robustness results of the baselines as well as our methods with TRADESdefense on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 benchmarks. The “Avg” column reports the averagedrobustness results for each methods under different attacks of all the radii.
Table 4: Comparison of accuracy and robustness results of baselines and our methods With PGDtraining betWeen the deterministic and the stochastic versions on CIFAR-10. The “Avg” columnreports the averaged robustness results for each methods under different attacks of all the radii.
Table 5: Robustness results under FGSM and IFGSM attacks with radius = 8/255 on the CIFAR-100 benchmarks. Our methods are equivalent to the ResNet baseline when η = 0. It can be seen thatη should be neither too small nor too large. When η grows larger in a proper range, the adversarialmodel robustness is gradually improved.
Table 6: Accuracy and robustness results of our methods as well as baselines under attacks ofdifferent strength levels on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 benchmarks.
Table 7: Comparison of accuracy and robustness results of baselines and our methods with PGDtraining between the deterministic and the stochastic versions on CIFAR-100. The “Avg” columnreports the averaged robustness results for each methods under different attacks of all the radii.
