Table 1: Evaluation of ProteoGAN and various baselines with our proposed measures (MMD, MRRand the more powerful gaussian kernel variant of MMD) on the testset. An arrow indicates that lower(J) or higher (↑) is better. Best results in bold, second best underlined. Given are mean values andstandard deviation over five different data splits. Due to the computational effort, the Unconditionalmodel was only trained on one split. The positive control is a sample of real sequences and simulatesa perfect model, the negative control is a sample that simulates the worst possible model for eachmetric (constant sequence for MMD, randomized labels for MRR). The second panel shows modelswithout multi-label conditioning, which were conditioned on simplified label sets. Also shown arevariants of ProteoGAN that were trained on different datasets with more specific labels.
Table A1: PepCVAE hyperparameters subject to BO optimization.
Table A2: CVAE of Greener et al. hyperparameters subject to BO optimization.
Table A3: Evaluation of ProteoGAN and PepCVAE on truncated sequences with length 32. Shownare mean and standard deviation of five different data splits. The arrows indicate that lower Q) orhigher (↑) is better.
Table A4: Hyperparameters subject to BOHB optimization.
Table A5: Hyperparameters found in the first and second BOHB optimization. Values with anasterisk indicate the preset configurations in the second optimization.
Table A6: MMD values with different percentage of mutations, p-valuesTable A7: Best and worst case MRR, as well as model evaluations of the main text with the extendedset of MRR measures. Positive Control simulates a perfect model, Negative Control a model thatignores conditional information.
Table A7: Best and worst case MRR, as well as model evaluations of the main text with the extendedset of MRR measures. Positive Control simulates a perfect model, Negative Control a model thatignores conditional information.
Table A8: Evaluation of ProteoGAN and various baselines with our proposed measures (MMD andMRR) and NetGO (Fmax) on a smaller testset testset (n=300, ca. 2% of the data). An arrow indicatesthat lower (，) or higher (↑) is better. Given are mean values of n = 10 (MMD/MRR) and n = 3(Fmax) different random seeds for the latent variable of the model. Note that models marked with(L=32) have been trained and evaluated on a set of truncated sequences and are hence not directlycomparable to the other values. Also, since without multi-label conditioning, the Unconditionalmodel was conditioned on different label sets as the other models and controls.
