Table 1: CO2 emissions (expressed in grams, i.e lower is better) for centralized training and FL on CIFAR10(top table) and ImageNet (bottom table). Emissions are calculated once the top-1 accuracy on the test setreaches 60% and 50% for CIFAR10 and ImageNet respectively. The number of epoch reported on the FLcolumn relates to the number of local epoch done per client. “IID” and “non-IID” terms are employed todistinguish between clients that have an evenly distributed set of samples containing all the classes (IID) andclients that have more samples of certain classes (non-IID).
Table 2: Run time results for FL and centralized training on the CIFAR10 (top table) and ImageNet(bottom table) datasets. “IID” and “non-IID” terms are employed to distinguish between clients thathave an evenly distributed set of samples containing all the classes (IID) and clients that have moresamples of certain classes (non-IID). The “Time” column corresponds to the run time per epoch forcentralized training or run time per communication round for FL. The “Max Acc.” column reportsthe maximum testing accuracy obtained. Finally, the “Rounds or Epochs” column gives the numberof rounds or epochs needed to reach the indicated level of testing accuracy.
Table 3: Run time results for FL and centralized training on the FashionMNIST dataset. “IID” and“non-IID” terms are employed to distinguish between clients that have an evenly distributed set ofsamples containing all the classes (IID) and clients that have more samples of certain classes (non-IID). The “Time” column corresponds to the run time per epoch for centralized training or run timeper communication round for FL. The “Max Acc.” column reports the maximum testing accuracyobtained. Finally, the “Rounds or Epochs” column gives the number of rounds or epochs needed toreach the indicated level of testing accuracy.
Table 4: CO2 emissions (expressed in grams, i.e lower is better) for centralized training and FLon FashionMNIST. Emissions are calculated once the top-1 accuracy on the test set reaches 90%.
Table 5: Details of the results obtained on CIFAR10 with multiple FL setups. “IID” and “non-IID”terms are employed to distinguish between clients that have an evenly distributed set of samplescontaining all the classes (IID) and clients that have more samples of certain classes (non-IID). The“Max Acc.” column reports the maximum testing accuracy obtained. The “Rounds” column givesthe number of rounds needed to reach the indicated level of testing accuracy. Finally, “Carbon Cost”numbers are obtained by applying Eq. 7 (lower is better).
