Table 1: Results on small and medium graphs. Each synthetic dataset consists of 50 randomlygenerated pairs labeled as “hgeneration algorithmi-hnumber of nodes in each graphi”. “BA”, “ER”,and “WS”refer to the Barabasi-Albert (BA)(Barabasi & Albert, 1999), the Erdos-Renyi (ER) (Gilbert,1959), and the Watts-Strogatz (WS) (Watts & Strogatz, 1998) algorithms, respectively. Nci109consists of 100 chemical compound graph pairs whose average graph size is 28.73. We show the ratioof the (average) size of the subgraphs found by each method with respect to the best result on thatdataset.
Table 2: Results on real-world large graph pairs. Each dataset consists of one large real graph pair(G1, G2 may not be isomorphic, but G1s, G2s are isomorphic guaranteed by search). Below eachdataset name, we show its size min(|V1 |, |V2|) to indicate these pairs are significantly larger than theones in Table 1. Consistent with Table 1, we show the ratio of the subgraph sizes.
Table 3: Abaltion study on real datasets.
Table 4: Details of real-world graph pairs used in evaluating the performance of baseline methodsand GLSearch.
Table 5: Training graph details. For synthetic graphs, “ed”, “p”, and “rd” represent edge density,rewiring probability, and ring density, respectively.
Table 7: Contribution of pre-training and imitation learning to the performance of GLSearch.
Table 8: Contribution of promise-based search (Section C.4) to the performance of GLSearch. “nopromise” denotes that the search does not use the proposed promise-based search, i.e. it does notbacktrack to an earlier state if the search makes no progress after a certain amount of iterations, andinstead, it continues the regular branch and bound search.
Table 9: Results of GLSearch to even larger networks. Each synthetic dataset consists of one graphpair labeled as hgeneration algorithmi-hnumber of nodes in each graphi. For BA graphs, we set theedge density to 4. For ER graphs, we set the edge density to 0.0016. For WS graphs, we set therewiring probability to 0.2 and ring density to 4.
Table 10: Results on graph pairs with a common core subgraph (lower bound of MCS), with a fixedruntime of 10 minutes.
