Table 1: Base Model is Dropout-VI model without Quantile Regularization and QR is when BaseModel is trained with Quantile Regularization. NLL stands for negative log likelihood. RMSEstands for Root Mean Square Error. Bold represents there is no overlap over 1 std interval.
Table 2: Base Model is Deep Ensemble without Quantile Regularization and QR is when BaseModel is trained with Quantile Regularization. NLL stands for negative log likelihood. RMSEstands for Root Mean Square Error. Bold represents there is no overlap over 1 std intervalI	FC-DenseNet57	FC-DenseNet103Model I Calibration Error(%)J RMSE J ∣ Calibration Error(%) J RMSE JBase	17.61	12.30	17.11	12.02QR (ours)	12.43	13.55	10.94	12.60Table 3: Base represents model trained without Quantile Regularization and QR represents Basemodel trained with Quantile Regularization.
Table 3: Base represents model trained without Quantile Regularization and QR represents Basemodel trained with Quantile Regularization.
Table 4: base+iso is DropoutVI without Quantile Regularization and after isotonic calibration andQR is when Base Model is trained with Quantile Regularization and after isotonic calibration.
Table 5: base+iso is Deep Ensemble without Quantile Regularization and after isotonic calibrationand QR+iso is when Base Model is trained with Quantile Regularization and after isotonic calibra-tion. RMSE stands for Root Mean Square Error. Maximum Likelihood represents maximum of thelikelihoods among test time points17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021C.2.2 Calibration Plots(a) Airfoil(b) Boston(c) ConcreteFigure 3: Dashed line (y=x) indicates perfect Calibration. The closer to dashed line, the better(d) White Wine18Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021(a) Airfoil(b) BostonPap-Pald0.20.00.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0
Table 6: Base Model is Dropout-VI model without Quantile Regularization and QR is when BaseModel is trained with Quantile Regularization. ’5 fold cross validation’ column considers the pro-cedure described above.
Table 7: Base Model is Deep Ensemble without Quantile Regularization and QR is when BaseModel is trained with Quantile Regularization. ’5 fold cross validation’ column considers the pro-cedure described above.
Table 8: ’Base after Iso’ represents Base model when composed with Isotonic Mapping. ’QR afterIso’ represents QR model when composed with Isotonic mapping.
