Table 1: Comparison between PABI and prior works: (1) Cross-type: PABI is a unified measurewhich can measure the benefit of different types of incidental signals (e.g., comparing a noisy datasetand a partially annotated dataset). (2) Mixed-type: PABI can measure the benefit of mixed incidentalsignals (e.g., a dataset that is both noisy and partially annotated). (3) PABI is derived from PAC-Bayesian theory but also easy to compute in practice; PABI is shown to have similar or betterpredicting capability of signals’ benefit (see Figs. 2 and 3 and Sec. 3.1).4task relatedness based on the richness of transformations between inputs for different tasks, but theiranalysis is limited to cases where data is from the same classification problem but the inputs are indifferent subspace. Juba (2006) proposes to use the joint Kolmogorov complexity (Li et al., 2008)to characterize relatedness, but it is still unclear how to compute the joint Kolmogorov complexityin real-world applications. Mahmud & Ray (2008) further propose to use conditional Kolmogorovcomplexity to measure the task relatedness and provide empirical analysis for decision trees, but itis unclear how to use their relatedness for other models, such as deep neural networks. Thrun &O’Sullivan (1998) propose to cluster tasks based on the similarity between the task-optimal distancemetric of k-nearest neighbors (KNN), but their analysis is based on KNN and itis unclear how to usetheir relatedness for other models. A lot of other works provide quite good qualitative analysis toshow various incidental signals are helpful but they did not provide quantitative analysis to quantifyto what extent these types of incidental signals can help (Balcan & Blum, 2010; Abu-Mostafa, 1993;Natarajan et al., 2013; Van Rooyen & Williamson, 2017; Baxter, 1998; London et al., 2016; Cilibertoet al., 2019; Ben-David et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2020). Compared to these theoretical analyses,
Table 2: K-gram co-occurrence analysis for PoS and NER in the whole Ontonotes dataset. Forexample, word-pos represents the percentage of k-gram words that have the unique k-gram PoSlabels.
Table 3: Summary of core notations in the estimation process for transductive signals.
