Table 1: Median and mean expected calibration error (ECE) achieved for domain-shifted data under differentialprivacy. Columns from left to right show the median/mean ECE achieved over all perturbations, number ofprivate data sources, number of samples per source, and for ImageNet, CIFAR-100, and CIFAR-10. Bestcalibration is shown in bold.
Table 2: The impact of various factors on recalibration quality and privacy preservation.
Table 3: Classification accuracies for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet under the highest severity perturba-tions of the CIFAR-10-C, CIFAR-100-C, and ImageNet-C test sets. The classification models used achieve theexpected state-of-the-art results for accuracy on the unperturbed test sets.
Table 4: Expected calibration error (ECE) on CIFAR-10 without privacy constraints is shown. Columns fromleft to right show ECE for the baseline without calibration, recalibration with temperature scaling by minimizingthe negative log likelihood, recalibration with temperature scaling by matching predictive confidence to accuracy(our method), and recalibration by minimizing the ECE directly. Rows indicate the type of perturbation applied.
Table 5: Expected calibration error (ECE) on CIFAR-100 without privacy constraints is shown. Columns fromleft to right show ECE for the baseline without calibration, recalibration with temperature scaling by minimizingthe negative log likelihood, recalibration with temperature scaling by matching predictive confidence to accuracy(our method), and recalibration by minimizing the ECE directly. Rows indicate the type of perturbation applied.
Table 6: Expected calibration error (ECE) on ImageNet without privacy constraints is shown. Columns fromleft to right show ECE for the baseline without calibration, recalibration with temperature scaling by minimizingthe negative log likelihood, recalibration with temperature scaling by matching predictive confidence to accuracy(our method), and recalibration by minimizing the ECE directly. Rows indicate the type of perturbation applied.
Table 7: Median and mean expected calibration error (ECE) achieved for domain-shifted data with a perturbationseverity of 1 under differential privacy.
