Table 1: DeepMind control suite benchmark environments from images (CURL) and states (SAC). Resultsof CURL (Srinivas et al., 2020), CURL-D2RL, SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and SAC-D2RL, on the standardDM Control Suite benchmark environments. CURL (Srinivas et al., 2020) and CURL-D2RL are trained purelywith pixel observations while SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and SAC-D2RL are trained with proprioceptivefeatures. The results for CURL were taken directly as reported by Srinivas et al. (2020). CURL-ResNet is thebaseline that uses a similar network as CURL-D2RL but with residual connections. Similarly, SAC-ResNetis the baseline that uses a similar network as SAC-D2RL but with residual connections. The S.D. is over 5random seeds.
Table 2: Real World RL suite environments from states. Results of TD3 (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and TD3-D2RL, on the Real World RL suite environments after 500K environment steps over 5 seeds. We see thatusing D2RL we are able to perform better in environments with distractors, random noise and delays. Theseexperiments show how D2RL is able to learn robust agents.
Table 3: OpenAI Gym benchmark environments with TD3. Comparison of the proposed variation D2RLand the baselines on a suite of OpenAI-Gym environments. We tabulate effective ranks of the feature matrices(learned weight matrices of the penultimate layer of the networks) for D2RL and a normal MLP, with the TD3algorithm after 1M interactions, corresponding to Fig. 4. The value is the average over 5 random seeds roundedoff to the nearest integer. A loss in rank of the matrix of weights of the penultimate layers (corresponding tolearning features) leads to a loss in effectively expressivity of the network, and has been shown to correlatewith poor performance (Kumar et al., 2020). Higher is better.
Table 4: Hyperparameters used for SAC in all the experiments. The hyperparameter values are kept the sameacross SAC and SAC-D2RL baselines in all the environments.
Table 5: Hyperparameters used for DMControl CURL experiments. The hyperparameter values are kept thesame across CURL, CURL-D2RL, and CURL-ResNet baselines.
Table 6: Consolidated details of all the environments used in our experimentsEnvironment	Type	Controller	Inputs	Action dim.	Input dim.
