Table 1: Poisoning points needed to achieve target classifiers induced from our attack. Top row meansnumber of poisoning points used by our attack. Bottom row means the lower bound computed fromTheorem 4.2 for the induced classifiers. All results are averaged over 4 runs, integer value in the cellmeans we get exactly same value for 4 runs and others are shown with the average and standard error.
Table 2: Poisoning points needed to achieve target classifiers induced from our attack. Top row meansnumber of poisoning points used by our attack. Bottom row means the lower bound computed fromTheorem 4.2 for the target classifiers. All results are averaged over four runs. An integral valuein a cell means we get exactly that same value for all four runs; for the one cell where we observevariation, we report the average and standard error.
Table 3: Poisoning points needed to achieve target classifiers induced from the KKT attack. Top rowmeans number of poisoning points used by the KKT attack. Bottom row means the lower boundcomputed from Theorem 4.2 for the target classifiers. All results are averaged over 4 runs, integervalue in the cell means we get exactly same value for 4 runs and others are shown with the averageand standard error.
Table 4: Comparison of two target generation methods on number of poisoning points used to reach0.1-closeness to the target. Original indicates the original target generation process from Koh et al.
Table 5: Generate target classifiers using objective-driven label-flipping attacks and achieve similarattacker objectives using our attack with fewer poisoning points. The attacker objectives are toincrease the test error to certain amounts (i.e., 5%, 10% and 15%) and the target classifiers to ourattack are generated by running the label-flipping attacks with given attacker objectives.
Table 6: Comparison of our attack to the min-max attack with different poisoning ratios. The targetmodel of our attack is of 15% error rate. The poisoning ratio is with respect to the full training setsize of 13,007. Each cell in the table denotes the test accuracy of the classifier after poisoning. Theclean test accuracy is 98.9%. Our attack at 30% poisoning ratio is marked with “*” because the attackterminates when the induced model is 0.1-close to the target model, which only uses 2,894 poisoningpoints and is less than the 30% ratio.
Table 7: Comparison of our attack to the label-flipping based subpopulation attack. The table com-pares the test accuracy on subpoplation of Adult dataset under same number of poisning points. Thenumber of poisons are determined when our attack achieves 0% test accuracy on the subpopulation.
Table 8: SVM on Dogfish dataset: poisoning points needed to achieve target classifiers induced fromour attack. Top row means number of poisoning points used by our attack. Bottom row means thelower bound computed from Theorem 4.2 for the induced classifiers.
