Table 1: Comparing GG-GAN to SotA methods in graph generation. The reported scores (lower isbetter) measure the MMD between the graph statistics of 512 test and generated graphs. The MMDthreshold measures differences between training and test sets; it aims to quantify how small a “good”score should be. Green indicates a score not larger than the MMD threshold, and larger scores areScrMatch	CondGENFigure 3: Examples (non-handpicked) of generated graphs on the QM9 dataset. Novel graphs arein green, graphs found in the training set are in orange, and duplicates are grayed out. GG-GANexhibits higher novelty than all methods that capture the QM9 distribution (see also Figures 6 and 7).
Table 2: Number of isomorphism classes not in the training set found within a sample of 5000generated graphs (higher is better). We report novelty for generators producing graphs with reasonableMMD scores. In Chordal9, we verify whether the generated graph is chordal and different from thetraining set (rather than a direct comparison with the test set).
Table 3: Hyperparameters used in the experiments for PointMLP and GG-GANTable 4 summarizes the hyperparameters used for our discriminator (see Table D.4 for an explanationof the architecture) throughout all our experiments. L refers to the number of ResBlocks in theDenseGIN, crh is the hidden layer of the final readout MLP, clo is the output node feature dimensionof the ResBlock l, cli and clh analogously refer to the input features of each ResBlock and the widthof the hidden layer of the SkipGINs inner MLP respectively.
Table 4: Discriminator hyperparameters for all experimentsC.2 DatasetsQM9. The QM9 dataset contains 133,885 organic compounds. Following De Cao & Kipf (2018),our experiments focused on a 5k subset. Most of the graphs in this dataset have 9 nodes.
Table 5: MMD results between the training set and the test sets used.
Table 6: Comparison between random context (RC) and random set (RS) models. The mean andstandard deviation correspond to the results of 3 runs of the same model. We also report the generatedgraphs in the dataset and the isomorphic classes of such models.
Table 7: Number of isomorphism classes not in the training set found within a sample of 5000generated graphs (higher is better). In Chordal9, we additionally verify whether the generated graphis chordal or not (rather than a direct comparison with the test set).
