Table 1: Comparison of the inception score (higher is better) and Frechet inception distance (loweris better) for our proposed modification to BigGAN architecture trained on logarithmic DWT spec-trograms (resolution 128 × 128). Unhighlighted rows refer to the models with running spectral nor-malization and DDFN on D(x; θd) and G(z; θg), respectively. Highlighted rows denote the modelswith orthogonal regularization and spectral normalization without DDFN. Scores are averaged over5k generated spectrograms over 10 different runs for each dataset. The left values in the iterationcolumn are associated with the highest achieved IS/FID before initial collapse, and the right valuesrefer to the extreme collapse onsets.Values inside parenthesis in the last two columns correspondto linear-DWT, logarithmic-real-DWT, and STFT representations. Accordingly, up-/down-ward ar-rows denote increase/decrease in scores relative to the logarithmic DWT. The best results are shownin boldface.
Table 2: Comparison of average IS, FID and SNR for different models trained on logarithmic DWTspectrograms. Outperforming values are in bold. Spectral normalization applied only on D(x; θd)for all the BigGANs and its modified variant (the proposed architecture). Res. stands for resolution.
Table 3: Comparison of the inception score and Frechet inception distance for three state-of-the-artGAN configurations on CIFAR-10 dataset. In all these experiments the batch size is set to 512.
Table 4: Extended comparison of average IS, FID and SNR for different models trained on logarith-mic DWT spectrograms. Outperforming values are in bold. Spectral normalization applied only onD(x; θd) for all the BigGANs and its modified variant (the proposed architecture). Res. stands forresolution.
Table 5:	Our slightly modified BigGAN architecture for the resolution 128×128 spectrograms.
Table 6:	The modified BigGAN architecture for 256 X 256 sPectrograms. This architecture has oneadditional residual network comPared to smaller resolution 128.
