Table 1: Base models for creating DML-based models for each dataset(a) BaselineFigure 1: Distribution of non-zero CLEVER scores for baseline ensemble and DML-based ensemblefor 1000 randomly selected images from the MNIST dataset. The CLEVER scores are computed onthe L2-norm ball with radius 2.
Table 2: MNIST white-box attack results. FGSM and PGD are applied with specific perturbationbudget E. CW is used with the specified penalty (initial constant) parameter γ.
Table 3: White-box attack results for CIFAR-10 and RESISC-45 datasets. FGSM and PGD areapplied with specific perturbation budget e. CW is used with the specified penalty (initial constant)parameter γ.
Table 4: Adversarial accuracy of all ensemble models when the attacks are crafted on Model 1 withPGD-10. The labels for the targeted attacks are selected randomly and different from the true labels.
Table 5: The required L2 distortion for adaptive CW-L2 attack (He et al., 2017) with γ = 1 forthe combined and individual ensemble members of size 5 for 100 randomly selected images foreach dataset. The number of iterations and stepsize are 1000, 0.1, respectively. K is denoting theconfidence parameter for CW-L2 attack.
Table 6: Accuracy of white box attacks on DML-based ensemble and randomized DML (R-DML)ensemble (R-DML-ensemble) for the perturbation budget E specified for each dataset. The attacksare performed with 5 random restarts.
Table 7: MNIST AutoAttack (Croce & Hein, 2020) results. The adversaries are crafted with thespecified perturbation budgets E.
Table 8: AutoAttack (Croce & Hein, 2020) results for CIFAR-10 and RESISC-45 datasets. Theadversaries are crafted with the specified perturbation budgets E.
Table 9: Accuracy of extended white box attacks on DML based ensemble (DML-ensemble) andrandomized smoothing DML ensemble (R-DML-ensemble) for the perturbation budget W specifiedfor each dataset. The attacks are performed with 5 random restarts.
Table 10: RESISC-45 extensive white-box attack results by scaling the M matrix. FGSM and PGDare applied with specific perturbation scale e. CW is used with the specified penalty parameter γ.
Table 11: Adversarial aCCuraCy of models when the attaCks are Crafted on the target Model 1 withPGD-10. The labels form the targeted attaCks are seleCted randomly and different from true labels.
Table 12: The rate of required L2 distortion for adaptive CW-L2 attack (He et al., 2017) with γ = 1for the combined and individual ensemble members of size 5 for 100 randomly selected images. Thenumber of iterations and stepsize are 1000, 0.1, respectively. K is denoting the confidence parameterfor CW-L2 attack. The model trained without using meta-model and diversity imposed only bescaling the M matrix per each ensemble member.
