Table 1: Differential score (DS) for PTB, Reddit and Wikitext-103 dataset across different token andphrase frequencies. White cell background means that the differential rank DR (as approximated byour beam search) of the phrase is 0, grey cell background means that DR is >1000.
Table 2: DSMM of the mixed frequence canary phrase for the Reddit (RNN) model using differentupdate techniques. We use T (R, Dorig) → M to denote that model M was obtained by trainingon data Dorig starting from model R. Here, R are (fresh) random initial parameters, Dextra is anadditional dataset from the same distribution as Dorig, and C is the set of canaries. Re-training refersto training on the data from scratch with a new random initialization, whereas continued trainingfine-tunes an existing model on fresh data. A white cell background means that the differential rankDR (as approximated by our beam search) of the phrase is 0, grey cell background means that DR is>1000.
Table 3: Top ranked phrases in vanilla and group beam search for RNN and Transformer modelstrained with rec.sport.hockey. For the layperson: NHL stands for National Hockey League;Los Angeles Kings, Minnesota North Stars, and Toronto Maple Leaf are NHL teams; Norm Greenwas the owner of the North Stars; an ice hockey game consists of three periods with overtime to breakties. Capitalization added for emphasis.
Table 4: Top ranked phrases in vanilla and group beam search for RNN and Transformer modelstrained with talk.politics.mideast. Center for Policy Research is a prolific newsgroupposter; Professor of History is a common title appearing in message signatures; many of the postsaround the time the 20 Newsgroups dataset (Lang, 1995) was collected discuss tensions betweenTurkey and Armenia.
Table 5: Relative differential score of phrases found by beam search when re-training from scratchand continuing training from a previous model. The results are for RNN models trained on partitionsof the Reddit dataset with N = talk.politics.mideast. Cells for which continued trainingyields a higher score than re-training appear in bold font. Capitalization added for emphasis.
