Table 1: Real-world regression dataset results. Overall prediction performance (metric: MAE, loweris better) and fidelity (metric: R2 score, higher is better) on regression problems with ridge regres-sion as the locally interpretable model. ‘Original’ is the performance of the original black-box modelthat the models are approximating. MAE of global ridge regression (RR) can be found below thedata name. Red represents performance that is worse than global ridge regression and the negativeR2 scores. Bold represents the best results.
Table 2: Real-world classification dataset results. Overall prediction performance (metric: APR,higher is better) and fidelity (metric: R2 score, higher is better) on classification problems withshallow regression tree as the locally interpretable model. ‘Original’ is the performance of theoriginal black-box model that the models are approximating. APR of global decision tree (DT) canbe found below the data name.
Table 3: Data Statistics (# represents the number). Label distributions: # of positive labels (positivelabel ratio) for classification problem, Mean (5%-50%-95% percentiles) for regression problem.
Table 4: Real-world regression dataset results. Overall prediction performance (metric: MAE, loweris better) and fidelity (metric: R2 score, higher is better) on regression problems with shallow regres-sion tree as the locally interpretable model. ‘Original’ is the performance of the original black-boxmodel that the models are approximating. MAE of global regression tree (RT) can be found belowthe data name. Red represents performance that is worse than global regression tree and the negativeR2 scores. Bold represents the best results.
Table 5: Fidelity results (Metric: LMAE, lower the better) on regression problems with shallowregression tree as the locally interpretable model. Bold represents the best results.
Table 6: Real-world classification dataset results. Overall prediction performance (metric: APR,higher is better) and fidelity (metric: R2 score, higher is better) on classification problems withridge regression as the locally interpretable model. ‘Original’ is the performance of the originalblack-box model that the models are approximating. APR of global logistic regression (LR) can befound below the data name. Red represents the results that are worse than global logistic regressionand the negative R2 scores. Bold represents the best results.
Table 7: Fidelity results (Metric: LMAE, lower the better) on regression problems with ridge re-gression as the locally interpretable model. Bold represents the best results.
Table 8: Average Weight Differences (AWD) of RL-LIM, STE, and L2R on three synthetic datasets.
