Table 1: Comparison of conventional reconstruction metrics between different models.
Table 2: Biologically motivated experiments. Random, Endothelial, and Tumor-Tumor experimentsare controls.
Table 3: Average PD-1/PD-L1 expression on the mixed tumor environment. The bolded cells indi-cate which cells are being measured.
Table 4: Average PDL1 expression of macrophages/monocytes on the compartmentalized tumorenvironment.
Table 5: sm persistent vector interpretability experiments.
Table 6: Architecture details of CCIGAN’s generatorwhere ResBlk is the residual block with skip connection used in ResNet (He et al., 2016), andSPADE is the spatially-adaptive normalization layer. The detailed architecture of our discriminatoris shown on Table 7.
Table 7: Architecture details of CCIGAN’s discriminator13Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020For all baseline models, we use the architecture based on the their original implementation. Due tothe size of the cell patch is (64, 64), we reduce the size of hidden layers to fit our dataset. For faircomparison, we use the same reduction of hidden layers and the same discriminator architecture forSPADE, pix2pixHD, and CCIGAN.
Table 8: Hyperparameters of modelsA.3 Evaluation MetricsA.3.1 Reconstruction MetricsGiven the generated image set X = {Xi }iN=1 and the ground truth set Y = {Yi}iN=1 with Xi , Yi ∈R(M,H,W), the L1/MSE score is defined as follows,NML(X,Y)= XXksort(Ui Θ Xi,m) - sort(Ui Θ Yi,m)k*	(16)i=1 m=1where k ∙ k * can be either Li or L? norm, Θ is the element-wise product, Xi,m and Yim are the m-thchannel of the i-th cell patch, Ui ∈ {0, 1}(H,W) is the mask matrix which masks all the cells in i-thpatch. For any matrix A, sort(A) is the sort function that sorts all entries of A. The sorting functionensures our metrics are position independent and only measures the intensity of the generated imageand ground truth. The score function L(X, Y) only computes the loss of sorted expression inside of14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020the cells. Then we add penalization for expression outside of cells. The adjusted L1/MSE score isintroduced as follows,MLadj(X,Y) = X ksort(Ui	Xi,m) - sort(Ui	Yi,m)k
Table 9: Additional cell interaction trends captured by CCIGAN.
