Table 1: Examples from our medical question-pairs datasetQuestion 1	Question 2	LabelAfter how many hour from drinking an antibiotic can I drink alcohol?	I have a party tonight and I took my last dose of Azithromycin this morning. Can I have a few drinks?	SimilarWhat specific exercises would help bur- sitis of the suprapatellar?	Can I take any medication for pain due to suprapatellar bursitis? Unable to ex- ercise.:(	Differentlanguage models to medical tasks (Ben Abacha et al., 2019). However, these models are not trainedon medical information, and make errors that reflect this. In this work, we augment the featuresin these general language models using the depth of information that is stored within a medicalquestion-answer pair to embed medical knowledge into the model. Our models pre-trained onthis task outperform models pre-trained on out-of-domain question similarity with high statisticalsignificance, and the results show promise of generalizing to other domains as well.
Table 2: Examples from our data generation setup. Columns 1 and 2 are used to generate similarquestion pairs while columns 1 and 3 generate dissimilar question pairs.
Table 3: Three sets of results comparing use of an in-domain question-answer task (QA) to anout-of-domain question-similarity task (QQP) for pre-trainingModel Intermediate Train Set Size	XLNet 364k	BERT 364k	BERT 27kBaseline (No intermediate)	77.7% ±2.1%	78.5% ±1.3%	78.5% ±1.3%Quora Question Pairs (QQP)	78.2% ±0.2%	78.2% ±0.8%	77.9% ±0.4%HealthTap (QA)	82.6% ±0.8%	81.6% ±0.8%	78.3% ±0.7%WebMD (QA)	—	—	79.2% ±1.2%Here we investigate whether domain of the training corpus matters more than task-similarity whenchoosing an intermediate training step for the medical question similarity task. Accuracy on thefinal task (medical question similarity) is our quantitative proxy for performance.
Table 4: Example question pair that was augmented to reveal which aspects of the question pair thenetwork failed to understandquestion answering embedded medically relevant information into the model that the out-of-domainmodels are still missing. More examples of errors we analyzed can be found in Appendix A.
Table 5: Examples that were consistently labeled wrong by at least one model type. Patterns revealthe key differences in what is learned by each intermediate taskQuestion 1	Question 2	LabelBaseline	QQP	QA	AA	QC		Whatto do if I have hypertension, depression of lost love, completely broke, what to do?	I recently lost my job and the love of my life. The RN who saw me yesterday said I have high blood pressure. I feel depressed, how do I get better?	samewrong	wrong	correct	correct	wrong		How many tylenol (acetaminophen) 3's are equal to a percocet?	I am out of Percocet, how many Tylenol pills should I take to give a similar amount of pain relief?	samewrong	wrong	correct	wrong	wrong		How do u know the days u ovulate if your period changes every month and how do I increase my chances of becomming pregnant?	How can one track one's ovulation with irregular periods?	samewrong	wrong	correct	wrong	wrong		How does a doughnut get broken down in the digestive system if it has essentially no nutrients?	Do doughnuts have any nutrient value or are they pure junk?	differentwrong	correct	wrong	wrong	wrong		Is it contraindicated to insert a urinary catheter into a patient who has a myocardial infarction?	In case of urinary incontinence in a patient with myocardial infarction, what are the options to help the patient pass urine except a urinary catheter?	differentcorrect	correct	correct	wrong	wrong		Can Celiac Disease mimic MS even after being treated with a strict gluten-free diet? Could my untreated Celiac have caused my brain lesions?	Does a strict gluten free diet help in complete control of Celiac disease?	differentcorrect	correct	correct	wrong	wrong		At a doctor's visit, I hit my head against a box on the wall containing hazardous materials (used syringes, used needles...). Will I get infected?	Today morning, I had an appointment with the doctor. After that, I saw the nurse for a shot. As I got up, her box syringes and needles fell all over me. She sent me home saying all is okay. But I am worried about an infection. Should I schedule another appointment for any blood tests?	samewrong	wrong	wrong	wrong	wrong		10Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
