Table 1: Comparing various state-of-the-art temporal collaborative ranking algorithms on variousdatasets. The (A) to (E) are non-deep-learning methods, the (F) to (K) are deep-learning methods andthe (L) to (O) are our variants. We did not report SSE-PT++ results for beauty, games and steam, asthe input sequence lengths are very short (see Table 4), so there is no need for SSE-PT++.
Table 2: Comparing SASRec, SSE-PT and SSE-PT++ on Movielens1M Dataset while varying themaximum length allowed and dimension of embeddings.
Table 3: Comparing Different Regularizations for SSE-PT on Movielen1M Dataset. NO REG standsfor no regularization. PS stands for parameter sharing across all users while PS(AGE) means PS isused within each age group. SASRec is added to last row after all SSE-PT results as a baseline.
Table 4: Description of Datasets Used in Evaluations.
Table 5: Comparing our SSE-PT, SSE-PT++ with SASRec on Movielen1M dataset. We use numberof negatives C = 100, dropout probability of 0.2 and learning rate of 1e-3 for all experiments whilevarying others. pu , pi , pu are SSE probabilities for user embedding, input item embedding and outputitem embedding respectively.
Table 6: Comparing our SSE-PT with SASRec on Movielens10M dataset. Unlike Table 5, we use thenumber of negatives C = 500 instead of 100 as C = 100 is too easy for this dataset and it gets toodifficult to tell the differences between different methods: Hit Ratio@10 approaches 1.
Table 7: Comparing Different SSE probability for user embeddings for SSE-PT on Movielens1MDataset. Embedding hidden units of 50 for users and 100 for items, attention blocks of 2, SSEprobability of 0.01 for item embeddings, dropout probability of 0.2 and max length of 200 are used.
Table 8: Comparing Different Sampling Probability, ps, of SSE-PT++ on Movielens1M Dataset.
Table 9: Comparing Different Number of Blocks for SSE-PT while Keeping The Rest Fixed onMovielens1M and Movielens10M Datasets.
Table 10: Varying number of negatives C in evaluation on Movielens1M dataset. Other hyper-parameters are fixed for a fair comparison.
