Table 1: Performance of the noisy-OR network learning algorithm with recognition network. Eachrow reports statistics for 500 runs of the algorithm with random initializations. The 95% confidenceintervals are included. The first column denotes the number of latent variables used in learning,the second column the average number of ground truth latent variables recovered, the third columnthe percentage of runs with full ground truth recovery, and the fourth column the average held-outnegative log-likelihood.
Table 2: Performance of the noisy-OR network learning algorithm with recognition network andbatch size 1000. Each row reports statistics for 500 runs of the algorithm with random initializations.
Table 3: Performance of the noisy-OR network learning algorithm with mean-field variationalposterior. Each row reports statistics for 500 runs of the algorithm with random initializations. The95% confidence intervals are included. The first column denotes the number of latent variables usedin learning, the second column the average number of ground truth latent variables recovered, thethird column the percentage of runs with full ground truth recovery, and the fourth column the averageheld-out negative log-likelihood.
Table 4: Performance of the noisy-OR network learning algorithm with recognition network on themisspecified data sets (IMG-FLIP and IMG-UNIF). Each row reports statistics for 500 runs of thealgorithm with random initializations. The 95% confidence intervals are included. The first columndenotes the number of latent variables used in learning, the second column the average number ofground truth latent variables recovered, the third column the percentage of runs with full ground truthrecovery, and the fourth column the average held-out negative log-likelihood.
Table 5: Performance of the sparse coding learning algorithm. Each row reports statistics for 500runs of the algorithm with random initializations. The 95% confidence intervals are included. Thefirst column denotes the number of latent variables used in learning, the second column the averagenumber of ground truth columns recovered, the third column the percentage of runs with full groundtruth recovery, and the fourth column the average error.
