Table 1: Configuration of balanced data settings.
Table 2: Test accuracy (%) of the trials in Figure 3. Values outside/inside brackets denote onemeasured after the whole training and the highest one during the rounds, respectively. NMom:Nesterov momentum SGD; BS: minibatch size. Note that weight decay factor of 0.00005 is thebaseline configuration.
Table 3: Test accuracy (%) of the trials in Figure 4.
Table 4: Test accuracy (%) of the trials in Figure 6. Note that weight decay factor of 0.00005 is thebaseline configuration.
Table 5: Summary of the failure cases under the non-IID data setting. PD: parameter divergence.
Table 6: The network models used in the experiments.
Table 7: Test accuracy (%) comparison of NetA-Baseline with respect to optimizers. Values out-side/inside brackets denote one measured after the whole training and the highest one during therounds, respectively. PMom: Polyak momentum SGD; NMom: Nesterov momentum SGD; BS:minibatch size.
Table 8: Test accuracy (%) comparison with respect to network depth. Values outside/inside brack-ets denote one measured after the whole training and the highest one during the rounds, respectively.
Table 9: Test accuracy (%) comparison with respect to network width. Values outside/inside bracketsdenote one measured after the whole training and the highest one during the rounds, respectively.
Table 10: Test accuracy (%) comparison of NetA-BaSeline with respect to weight decay levels.
Table 11: Test accuracy (%) comparison of NetA-Baseline with/without Batch Normaliza-tion/Renormalization. Values outside/inside brackets denote one measured after the whole train-ing and the highest one during the rounds, respectively. BN: Batch Normalization; BRN: BatchRenormalization.
Table 12: Test accuracy (%) comparison of NetA-Baseline with/without data augmentation. Valuesoutside/inside brackets denote one measured after the whole training and the highest one during therounds, respectively. DA: data augmentation.
Table 13: Test accuracy (%) comparison of NetA-Baseline with/without Dropout. Values out-side/inside brackets denote one measured after the whole training and the highest one during therounds, respectively. DO: Dropout.
Table 14: Configuration of unbalanced data settings. #Cls/L: the number of classes in each learner’slocal training dataset; #Exs/L: the number of training examples in each local dataset.
Table 15: Test accuracy (%) comparison on CIFAR-10 under the balanced and the unbalanced datasettings. Values outside/inside brackets denote one measured after the whole training and the highestone during the rounds, respectively.
