Table 1: Performance of the proposed imitation attack compared with the white-box attacks andsubstitute attacks on MNIST. The architectures of networks are shown in Table 9. “White-box”:generate adversarial examples from the attacked medium network. “Substitute”: generate adversar-ial examples from the pre-trained large network. “Imitation”: generate adversarial examples fromthe imitation large network. The numbers in ( ) denote the average LF perturbation distance perimage.
Table 2: Performance of the proposed imitation attack compared with the white-box attacks andsubstitute attacks on CIFAR-10. The attacked model is VGG-16.
Table 3: Performance of the proposed imitation attack compared with the decision-based and score-based attacks on MNIST. “Query”: the average number of queries of attacks. “LF”: the averageLF distance per image. “imitation-train”: the performance of imitation attack on its training data.
Table 4: Performance of the proposed imitation attack compared with the decision-based and score-based attacks on CIFAR-10.
Table 5: Performance of the imitation networks with different capacity on MNIST. The attackedmodel is pre-trained medium network. The architectures of networks are shown in Table 9. Theadversarial examples generated by the same attack methods have the same perturbation distance.
Table 6: Performance of the imitation networks with different capacity on CIFAR-10. The attackedmodel is pre-trained VGG-16. The adversarial examples generated by the same attack methods havethe same perturbation distance.
Table 7: Comparisons between imitation model and other substitute models. “Accuracy”: the clas-sification accuracy on other images from test set. The numbers in ( ) denote the average LF pertur-bation distance per image.
Table 8: Comparisons between imitation model and other substitute models. “Accuracy”: the clas-sification accuracy on other images from test set.
Table 9: Network architectures for MNIST. Convolutional kernel (A × B, C) denotes the kernel sizeand channel number, respectively.
Table 10: Network architectures for generative model in our experiments.
