Table 1: Dataset statistics.
Table 2: Results when agents are trained and tested in a single role, before any internal-consistencyconstraints. These scores are mean accuracy with 95% confidence range averaged over 5 runs overdifferent test set samplings (the distractors change).
Table 3: Performance on task of referring to/fetching unseen items for baseline model comparedagainst models with the internal-consistency constraints. To highlight the difference of each con-straint compared to the baseline performance, each delta compares the performance of the modi-fied model to the baseline model. In this setting, we see no clear advantage to enforcing internal-consistency via self-play. These scores are mean accuracy with 95% confidence interval averagedover 5 runs over different test set samplings (the distractors change).
Table 4: Performance for tasks that requires agents to generalize across roles-e.g. training on theword “blue” as a listener, but then having to produce “blue” as a speaker. “One Role” refers towhen agents receive direct feedback in a single role (i.e. their training on the other roles is onlyvia self-play). “Both Roles” refers to when agents receive direct feedback in both roles, but onlysee the test vocabulary in the role opposite that in which they are tested. To inspect the additivedifferences between the internal-consistency constraints, each delta compares the performance ofthe current column to the previous column. These scores are mean accuracy with 95% confidencerange averaged over 5 with different test set samplings (the distractors change).
Table 5: Self-play improves the model's communication: the agents’ respective positive listeningand positive signaling metrics both improve in the vanilla setting.
Table 6: Recurrent Model Hyperparameter Search Results.
Table 7: Transformer Model Hyperparameter Search Space.
Table 8: Deltas are compared to the baseline value for each row. Here We report the results forshared embeddings as well as self-play.
Table 9: Dataset statistics.
Table 10: Best Recurrent Model Hyperparameter Search Settings.
Table 11: Best Transformer Model Hyperparameter Settings.
