Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Language Models are
Open Knowledge Graphs
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Abstract
This paper shows how to construct knowledge graphs (KGs) from pre-trained lan-
guage models (e.g., BERT, GPT-2/3), without human supervision. Popular KGs
(e.g, Wikidata, NELL) are built in either a supervised or semi-supervised manner,
requiring humans to create knowledge. Recent deep language models automat-
ically acquire knowledge from large-scale corpora via pre-training. The stored
knowledge has enabled the language models to improve downstream NLP tasks,
e.g., answering questions, and writing code and articles. In this paper, we propose
an unsupervised method to cast the knowledge contained within language models
into KGs. We show that KGs are constructed with a single forward pass of the pre-
trained language models (without fine-tuning) over the corpora. We demonstrate
the quality of the constructed KGs by comparing to two KGs (Wikidata, TAC
KBP) created by humans. Our KGs also provide open factual knowledge that is
new in the existing KGs. Our code and KGs will be made publicly available.
1	Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are an important resource for both humans and machines. Factual knowl-
edge in KGs is injected into AI applications to imitate important skills possessed by humans, e.g.,
reasoning and understanding. KG construction is mainly supervised, requiring humans to handwrite
every fact, such as Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008) and Wikidata. KGs can also be constructed in a
semi-supervised way, in which a semi-automatic extractor is used to obtain the facts from web cor-
pora (e.g., NELL (Carlson et al., 2010) and Knowledge Vault (Dong et al., 2014)). HUmanS however
still need to interact with the extractor to improve the quality of the discovered facts. Therefore,
human supervision, which is often expensive, is required in constructing KGs.
Recent progress in language models (LMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT-2/3 (Rad-
ford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), has led to superior results even outperforming humans in a
wide range of tasks, e.g., sentence classification (Wang et al., 2018), question answering (Brown
et al., 2O2O). Pre-trained LMs are also capable to write poetry, music, and code, while such tasks
often require we human to spend a significant amount of time in learning the relevant knowledge to
work well. In fact, these pre-trained LMs automatically acquire factual knowledge from large-scale
corpora (e.g., BookCorpus (ZhU et al., 2015), Common Crawl (Brown et al., 2020)) via pre-training.
The learned knowledge in pre-trained LMs is the key to the current success. We therefore consider
the following question: instead of using the manually created knowledge, can we use the knowledge
stored in pre-trained LMs to construct KGs?
In this paper, we design an unsupervised approach called MaMa that successfully recovers the
factual knowledge stored in LMs to build KGs from scratch. MaMa constructs a KG with a single
forward pass of a pre-trained LM (without fine-tuning) over a textual corpus. As illustrated in
Figure L MAMA has two stages: Match and Map. Match stage generates a set of candidate facts by
matching the facts in the textual corpus with the knowledge in the pre-trained LM. General or world
knowledge from large-scale corpora is embedded in the LM, thus candidate facts in the target corpus
are often covered by the knowledge in the LM. The candidate facts are matched through an efficient
beam search in the attention weight matrices of the pre-trained LM without fine-tuning. Map stage
produces an open KG via mapping the matched candidate facts from Match stage to both fixed KG
schema and open schema. If the schema of candidate facts exists in the KG schema, we map the
candidate facts directly to the fixed KG schema. Otherwise, we reserve the unmapped candidate
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed approach MaMa. MaMa constructs an open knowledge graph (KG)
with a single forward pass of the pre-trained language model (LM) (without fine-tuning) over the corpus. Given
the input: a textual corpus containing passages and sentences, e.g., English Wikipedia, and a pre-trained LM,
e.g., BERT, GPT-2/3, MAMA (1) generates a set of candidate facts via matching the knowledge in the pre-
trained LM with facts in the textual corpus, e.g., a candidate fact (Dylan, is, songwriter) from the sentence
“Dylan is a songwriter.”, and (2) produces an open KG by mapping the matched candidate facts to both an
existing KG schema, e.g., (Bob.Dylan.Q392, occupation.P106, Songwriter.Q753110) in Wikidata schema, and
an open schema, e.g., (Bob-Dylan.Q392, sign, AlberLGroSSman.Q708584).
facts in the open schema. This results in a new type of KG, open KG, with a mixture of mapped
facts in fixed KG schema and unmapped facts in the open schema.
Our contributions are as follows:
1.	We show how to construct KGs from pre-trained LMs. The KGs are constructed with a
single forward pass of the pre-trained LMs without fine-tuning over the textual corpora.
This helps researchers explicitly understand what the language models learn, bridging the
deep LM and KG communities through enhanced model transparency.
2.	We propose an unsupervised two-stage approach, MAMA, to first match the candidate facts
in the corpora with the knowledge stored in LMs, then map the matched candidate facts to
both fixed and open schema to produce a KG.
3.	We generate anew type of KG, namely open KG, consists of mapped facts in the fixed KG
schema of existing KGs (Wikidata and TAC KBP) annotated by humans; and unmapped
facts in the open schema that are new in the reference KG schema. The reach of this result
is broad and has downstream utility for knowledge graph construction, deep neural network
interpretation, and information extraction.
2	MaMa
We introduce an unsupervised end-to-end approach Match and Map (MaMa) as illustrated in Fig-
ure 1 to construct open knowledge graphs (KGs) from language models (LMs). MAMA constructs
the KGs with a single forward pass of the pre-trained LMs (without fine-tuning) over the corpora.
The two stages of MaMa are:
Match generates a set of candidate facts from a textual corpus. LMs contain global or world knowl-
edge learned from large-scale corpora, which often does not perfectly match the knowledge in the
target corpus. The goal of this stage is to match the knowledge stored in pre-trained LMs with facts
in the corpus. Each fact is represented as a triplet (head, relation, tail)1, in short, (h, r,t), andpassed
to Map stage. Match procedure is detailed in Sec. 2.1.
Map produces an open KG using the matched candidate facts from Match stage. The constructed
open KG has two portions: (a) mapped candidate facts that are in a fixed KG schema, e.g., (Dylan,
is, songwriter) is mapped to (BOb-Dylan.Q392, occupation.P106, SOngWriter.Q753110) according
to Wikidata schema; and (b) unmapped candidate facts that are in an open schema, e.g., a can-
didate fact (Dylan, signed, Albert Grossman) is partially mapped to (Bob_Dylan.Q392, sign, Al-
bert_GrOSSman.Q708584) in the open schema. This stage is described in Sec. 2.2.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Step 0 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3
( Dylan is a songwriter )
Step	Action	Intermediate candidates	Matching degrees
0	START	(Dylan,	0
1	YIELD	(Dylan, is	0.3
2	YIELD	(Dylan, is songwriter	0.7
3	STOP	(Dylan, is, songwriter)	0.7
(a) Matching example.
Key:
(b) Attention matrix for matching
degree calculation.
Figure 2: Illustration of Match stage. The upper part of (a) represents the general matching steps of generating
the best matched candidate fact (Dylan, is, songwriter) from the sentence “Dylan is a songwriter.” The lower
portion shows the corresponding step-by-step process. Given a head-tail pair (Dylan, songwriter), at each
step, the search chooses one of the actions, i.e., START, YIELD, STOP to produce an intermediate candidate
fact. The search starts by adding the head “Dylan” as an initial candidate (step 0). The matching degree of
the candidate is initialized as 0. Next, a new candidate is yielded if the candidate has not reached the tail
“songwriter” (step 1 and step 2), by appending the next largest attended token (with the largest score from the
attention matrix (b) of the sentence) to the end of the current candidate, and the corresponding matching degrees
are increased by the associated attention scores (0.3 and 0.4) to 0.3 (0+0.3) and 0.7 (0.3+0.4) respectively.
Otherwise, the search stops, and the candidate fact with the best matching degree is returned for the head-tail
pair (step 3). The attention matrix (b) is from the forward pass of the LM without fine-tuning over the sentence.
“x” marks the tokens to prevent searching backward.
2.1	Match
We frame the matching procedure as a search problem. To obtain the best matched candidate facts of
an input sentence, the candidates with the top matching degrees are returned from a search process.
The matching degree is derived from the search in the attention weight matrices of the pre-trained
LM, since the attention weight matrices are one of the main containers of the knowledge in the
pre-trained LM. The attention weight matrices are simply from the forward pass of the LM without
fine-tuning over the sentence.
2.1.1	Beam Search
We design a simple-yet-effective beam search to find the best matched candidate facts. For every
head-tail pair (h, t) in a sentence, the search maintains the k-best matched candidate facts of the
pair. Let’s first consider the search from left to right with beam size equals to 1. An example search
process is shown in Figure 2. Given a head-tail pair (Dylan, songwriter), at each step, the search
performs one of the following actions:
START the search from the head. The head h is added as an initial candidate into the beam. For
simplicity, we use START(h) to denote the action, which returns a candidate (h,. In Fig-
ure 2(a), at step 0, the head “Dylan” is added as (Dylan, into the beam. The matching
degree is initialized to 0.
YIELD a new intermediate candidate in the beam if the current candidate has not reached the tail.
The next largest attended token (with the largest score from the attention matrix) is ap-
pended to the end of the current candidate to yield the new candidate. The corresponding
matching degrees are increased by the associated attention scores. At step 1 (orange arrow
in Figure 2(a)), “is” is appended to the current candidate to yield (Dylan, is, , since “is”
has the largest attention score with “Dylan” in the attention matrix. The attention score is
0.3 as highlighted in orange in Figure 2(b). The matching degree becomes 0.3 (i.e. 0+0.3).
The multi-head attention is reduced to a single head so that every two tokens of the sen-
tence are associated with one attention weight. We experiment with different reduction
We use the term “head” and “tail” to denote head and tail’s “entities” or “entity mentions” for simplicity.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Algorithm 1 Beam search for matching candidate facts.
Input: Head-tail pair (h, t), sentence s, attention matrix As, action manager O = {START, YIELD, STOP},
beam size k
Output: Candidate facts T(h,t)
1:	T(h,t) — {START(h)}	. Start by adding the head as a candidate in the beam
2:	while ∃c ∈ T(h,t) [O(c) = YIELD] do
3:	T(h,t) - 0	. Initialize a new beam
4:	for each c ∈ T(h,t) do
5:	if O(c) = YIELD then
6:	T(h,t) - T(h,t) ∪ {YIELD(c, s, As)}	. Yield a new candidate if not reached the tail
7:	else
8:	T(h,t) - T(h,t) ∪ {STOP(c, t)}	. Stop then produce a valid fact if reached the tail
9:	end if
10:	end for
11:	T(h,t) - TOP(k, Te(h,t))	. Maintain k-best candidates in the beam
12:	end while
13:	return T(h,t)
setups in Sec. A.3, “x" marks the tokens (prior to the current token) that are not consid-
ered in the search to prevent searching backward. Step 2 similarly takes YIELD action to
produce (Dylan, is songwriter, . The matching degree is now 0.7 (i.e. 0.3+0.4). We use
YIELD(c, s, As) to denote the action, where c is a current candidate, s represents the sen-
tence, and As is the attention matrix from the forward pass of the pre-trained LM over s,
which yields a new candidate.
STOP the search step if the candidate has reached the tail, then add the candidate as a valid candidate
fact into the beam. As beam size equals to 1, (Dylan, is, songwriter) is the only returned
candidate fact for the given pair. The final matching degree of the candidate is 0.7. We
denote this step using STOP(c, t), which returns a valid fact.
The details of the proposed beam search are in Algorithm 1, The inputs of the search algorithm
are a head-tail pair (h, t), a sentence s, an attention matrix As of s. Both h and t are identified
by the noun chunk in s. As is the attention matrix associated with s from the forward pass of LM
without fine-tuning. The search gets started by adding the head h as the initial candidate in the beam
(line 1). While there are still new candidates waiting to be yielded (line 2), the search continues,
and the top k candidates sorted by the matching degrees are maintained (line 3-11) in the beam. In
practice, we implement an action manager O to decide which action to take at each step. Given a
candidate c in the beam, O(c) = START always happens at the beginning of the search. If c has
not reached the tail t yet, O(c) = YIELD. Otherwise, O(c) = STOP. We convert the subwords to
the corresponding full words. We also notice some facts are in reverse order in the sentence, e.g.,
“…said Jason Forcier , a vice president at battery maker A123 Systems Inc." for facts of relation
“org:top_members_employees”，thus enable bidirectionality by running the algorithm in both direc-
tions (left to right and right to left). The beam search is implemented by the breadth-first search,
which is efficient as the time complexity is O(k ∙ d), where d is the maximum depth of the search
tree.
2.1.2	Filter
Although the basic functionality provided by beam search is sufficient for finding useful candidate
facts, we have found a few constraints useful. Given a candidate fact (h, r, t) from beam search
result T(h,t), it remains as a fact if satisfying all the following constraints.
Constraint #1 The matching degree of (h, r, t) is above a threshold. We compare the matching
degrees corpus-wide to only reserve the facts that are matched better with the knowledge in LMs. For
example, MAMA extracts a fact (Rolling Stone, wrote, pop song) from “Rolling Stone wrote: “No
other pop song has so thoroughly challenged artistic conventions"", which is not an accurate fact
based on the sentence. We observe the associated matching degree is below a proper threshold, while
the matching degrees of high-quality facts from the same documents, e.g., (Dylan, is, songwriter),
or confident facts from the other documents are beyond the threshold.
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Constraint #2 The distinct frequency of r is above a threshold. To avoid facts to be over-specified,
e.g., (Dylan, signed to Sam Peckinpah’s film, Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid), we require r should
take many distinct head-tail pairs in the corpus.
Constraint #3 Relation r is a contiguous sequence in the sentence. We can avoid r that has no
meaningful interpretation (Fader et al., 2011), e.g., (Rolling Stone, wrote challenged, conventions)
from the above sentence.
2.2	Map
The objective of Map stage is to generate an open KG. The open KG contains (a) mapped facts in
a KG schema (Sec. 2.2.1), e.g., Wikidata schema, if the schema of the candidate facts is within the
existing KG schema; and (b) unmapped facts from (a) in an open schema (Sec. 2.2.2).
2.2.1	Mapped Facts in KG Schema
The goal is to map a candidate fact (h, r, t) to a fact (hk ,rk ,tk) in the KG schema. The reason for
mapping to an existing KG schema is to make use of the high-quality schema designed by experts
(to avoid duplicated efforts of building from scratch) and enable evaluating the candidate facts with
oracle KG facts contributed by human volunteers. We first map both entities h, t to hk,tk, then map
the relation r to Irk in the reference KG schema. Additional details are presented in Sec. A.1.
Entity linking to KG schema We adapt an unsupervised entity linker based on a mention-to-entity
dictionary (SPitkoVSky & Chang, 2012) to link the entities for scalability consideration. Besides,
contextual information is crucial to link the entities correctly, we use the word embedding of the
context to disambiguate the entities, which means we only link the entities with high contextual
similarities based on the word embedding. We adopt the entity linker to map h, t to hk ,tk.
Relation mapping with KG schema We largely follow the relation mapping method proposed by
Angeli et al. (2015) to construct an offline relation map between KG relation and relation phrases of
the candidate facts. The basic idea is that the more often linked head-tail pairs (i.e., entities are with
type information from the entity linking step) co-occur between the candidate facts and KG facts, the
more likely the corresponding relations are mapped to each other. In addition, we normalize each
relation phrase of the candidate facts by lemmatization, and remoVing inflection, auxiliary Verbs,
adjectiVes, adVerbs. After the relation mapping is constructed, one author manually checks whether
the top 15 relation phrases are true mappings for each KG relation. We only reserVe the true ones in
the final relation mapping. This process takes approximately one day. Later, r is mapped to rk with
an efficient look-up operation in the relation mapping.
2.2.2	Unmapped Facts in Open Schema
An unmapped candidate fact (h, r, t) means at least one of h, r, and t is not mapped to the KG
schema based on the method in Sec. 2.2.1. There are two types of unmapped candidate facts:
Partially unmapped facts represent at least one of h, r, and t are mapped to the KG schema. It can
be h or t mapped to hk or tk based on the entity linker in Sec. 2.2.1. It can also be r that mapped
to rk using the relation mapping in Sec. 2.2.1. This actually results in unmapped facts that are in a
mixture of the KG schema and the open schema. As the oVerall schema of the unmapped facts is
not in the KG schema, we use open schema to denote such unmapped facts in the rest of the paper
for simplicity. An example is (Dylan, signed, Albert Grossman) in Figure 1, where both head and
tail are linked to Wikidata schema based on the entity linker in Sec. 2.2.1, but the relation cannot be
mapped since there is no relation mapping from “signed” to a KG relation in Wikidata schema.
Completely unmapped facts indicate all h, r, and t are not mapped to the KG schema. This means
neither the entity linker nor the relation mapping is able to map h, r, and t to hk, rk, tk respectiVely.
The resulting unmapped candidate facts stay in the open schema, e.g., a candidate fact (Jacob, was,
A Registered Mennonite) stays the same in the open schema from a sentence “Jacob was a registered
Mennonite in Amsterdam.”.
The resulting open KG is a new type of KG that mixes the fixed KG schema with the flexible
open schema, suggesting new directions for the next generation of KGs. The open KG not only
contains existing knowledge in the reference KGs, but also extends the fixed KG schema with an
additional open schema to improVe the coVerage of the KGs, that benefits the downstream KG based
applications, e.g., QA and commonsense reasoning (Wang et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
KG	# of oraclefacts	# of documents
TAC KBP Wikidata	27,655∣31 27,368,562	3,877,207 6,047,494
Table 1: Dataset statistics of two knowledge graphs: TAC KBP and Wikidata. TAC KBP refers to TAC KBP
Slot Filling 2013 challenge. # of oracle facts for TAC KBP is the number of oracle facts in the 2013 task. # of
documents for TAC KBP is the number of the documents in the 2013 task. # of oracle facts for Wikidata is the
total number of oracle facts in Wikidata. # of documents for Wikidata is the size of English Wikipedia.
3 Experiments
How well can language models generate knowledge graphs? We experimentally explore how well
can MaMa answer the question in the section. To measure the ability of LMs in generating KGs,
we directly measure the quality of resulting open KGs. The open KG contains two types of facts:
mapped facts in the fixed KG schema; and unmapped facts in the open schema. We first quanti-
tatively evaluate MaMa by comparing the mapped facts to oracle KGs annotated by humans in
Sec. 3.1, then conduct an in-depth analysis of the unmapped facts in Sec. 3.2.
3.1 Results on Mapped Facts
We first study the quality of the mapped facts. As the candidate facts have been mapped to the
schema of oracle KGs, we are able to quantitively compare the candidate facts with the oracle facts
in the reference KGs.
3.1.1 Datasets
We compare the mapped facts from MaMa with the facts in two KGs:
TAC KBP TAC Knowledge Base Population (KBP) Slot Filling is a task to search a document
collection to fill in the tail/object entity for predefined relations (slots) for a given head/subject
entity in a reference KG. We experiment with the reference KG in the 2013 challenge. We use the
document collection and oracle facts of the 2013 task. The statistic of the dataset is shown in Table 1.
Wikidata We use popular Wikidata as another KG. We use all the oracle facts in Wikidata. We use
the English Wikipedia as the text corpus, since a large amount of facts in Wikidata is from English
Wikipedia. The statistic is in Table 1.
To evaluate the mapped facts, we first use Match stage of MaMa to run over the corresponding
documents to generate the candidate facts. Then Map stage is leveraged to map the candidate facts
to the schema of TAC KBP and Wikidata respectively. The parameter settings, such as beam size in
Algorithm 1, are shared across TAC KBP and Wikidata based on the parameter study in Sec. A.3.
3.1.2 TAC KBP
To verify the ability to produce correct facts, we compare candidate facts from MaMa to the outputs
of two open information systems, which also produce triplets in the form of (h, r, t). After collecting
the triplets from the corresponding system, We use the same Map procedure with MAMA (Sec. 2.2.1)
to map the triplets to the corresponding KG schema.
Stanford OpenIE leverages POS tag and dependency parser, and generates self-contained clauses
from long sentences to extract the triplets, which is the best open information extraction system (An-
geli et al., 2015) on TAC KBP (Surdeanu, 2013).
OpenIE 5.1 2 is one of the state-of-the-art open information extraction systems, which is the suc-
cessor to Ollie (Schmitz et al., 2012), and it improves extractions from noun relations, numerical
sentences, and conjunctive sentences depending on the linguistic patterns.
We use two families of pre-trained LMs with MaMa. We use BERTBASE and BERTLARGE from
Devlin et al. (2018) with MaMa, namely MAMA-BERTBASE and MAMA-BERTLarge. Be-
sides, GPT-2s from Radford et al. (2019) are used, i.e., MAMA-GPT-2, MAMA-GPT-2medium,
MAMA-GPT-2LARGE, and MAMA-GPT-2XL.
2	，，	，	，
https://github.com/dair-iitd/OpenIE-standalone
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Method	#Params of LM	Precision%	Recall%	F1%
OPenIE 5.1团	-	56.98	14.54	23.16
Stanford OpenIE (Angeli et al.. 2015) MAMA-BERTBASE (Ours)	- 109M	_ _ 61.55 _ _ 一 ^ 61.57 一 一	_ _17.35 _ 一 ^18,79 一	_ _ 27-07 __ 28:79
MAMA-BERTLARGE (ours)	335M	61.69	18.99	29.05
M AMA-GPT-2 (ours)	117M	61.62	18.17	28.07
MAMA-GPT-2MEDIUM (ours)	345M	62.10	18.65	28.69
M AMA-GPT-2LARGE (ours)	774M	62.38	19.00	29.12
M AMA-GPT-2XL (ours)	1558M	62.69	19.47	29.72 (+2.65)
Table 2: Compare the quality of mapped facts on TAC KBP. #Params of LM refers to the number of parameters
of the pre-trained LM.
Table 2 shows the results on TAC KBP. We use the official scorer of TAC KBP Slot Filling 2013 to
evaluate precision, recall, and F1on TAC KBP 3.
MAMA constructs improved KGs compared to open IE. From the results, we find that all our
methods achieve competitive precision, which is greater than 60%, given the unsupervised nature of
MaMa. All the proposed methods outperform the two open IE systems. This shows that MaMa
is able to produce high-quality knowledge directly from pre-trained LMs by a single forward pass
without human supervision. The results show the effectiveness of MaMa in generating candidate
facts from Match stage, and producing high-quality KGs through Map stage. We also find that
MaMa-GPT-2XL performs the best. MaMa-GPT-2XL outperforms the previous state-of-the-art
Stanford OpenIE by over 2.6% in F1. This shows the proposed end-to-end MaMa is able to recover
the knowledge stored in pre-trained LMs without relying on any extra linguistic features, such as
POS tag and dependency parser used in open IE systems. The main reason leading to the moderate
results of OpenIE 5.1 is that the system generates objects of the triplets with extraneous words,
which hurt the performance in slot filling tasks. Even though the proposed methods all outperform
the two open IE systems in the recall, however improving recall is clearly the future direction to
further improve the performance of MaMa. We find that the main cause of the moderate recall is
the incorrect entities caused by SPaCy noun chunk as summarized in Sec. A.2.
Larger/deeper LMs produce KGs of higher quality. BERTLARGE outperforms BERTBASE since
the doubling parameter size. GPT-2s share similar trends, where we observe performance increases
when the model size increases. This complies with our intuition on more knowledge is stored in
deeper and larger models. Such increases in performance seem subtle on TAC KBP, we find this
might due to the relatively small number of oracle facts by noticing a more significant improvement
on Wikidata in Sec. 3.1.3. We plan to further improve the results with larger pre-trained LMs, e.g.,
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), Megatron-LM (ShOeybi et al., 2019).
BERT LMs outperform GPT-2 LMs under similar model sizes. More specifically, BERTBASE
performs better than MaMa-GPT-2 in F1, and MaMa-BERTLARGE outperforms MaMa-GPT-
2MEDIUM in F1. BERTBASE and MaMa-GPT-2 are similar in size, while MaMa-BERTLARGE
and MaMa-GPT-2MEDIUM are similar in model size as well. This is mainly because that the
recall of BERT LMs is higher than that of corresponding GPT-2 LMs. The result indicates that the
Cloze-style loss function (i.e., masked language model) of BERT is more effective and flexible in
recovering more knowledge than the autoregressive LM objective. We also notice that the precision
of GPT-2 LMs is higher than that of according BERT LMs. The reason is that the autoregressive
LM objective captures more accurate knowledge than Cloze-style loss does by not introducing extra
noise (e.g., masked tokens) during pre-training.
3.1.3 Wikidata
We select our best BERT based method MaMa-BERTLARGE, and GPT-2 based method MaMa-
GPT-2XL on TAC KBP to compare with Stanford OpenIE (the best open IE system on TAC KBP)
for scalability experiments on Wikidata. We follow the same definition as the slot filling task to
calculate precision, recall, and F1 on Wikidata. Table 3 summarizes the results.
MAMA is scalable to larger corpora. Similar to the trends on TAC KBP, MAMA-GPT-2XL per-
forms the best in precision, recall, and F1. The results show the effectiveness of MaMa in gen-
erating candidate facts and high-quality KGs. We also find that MaMa-GPT-2XL outperforms
MaMa-BERTLARGE by over 1% in F1. This shows that the larger model (GPT-2XL has 5x more
3e	…C	，。 ， ， ， “	， ，，	, 一……
There are 2,383 correct oracle facts based on the “manual runs” assessment in TAC KBP.
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Method	#Params of LM	Precision%	Recall%	F1%
Stanford OpenIE (Angeli et al., 2015)	-	2332	-13.09-	16:77
MAMA-BERTLARGE (OurS) 1	335M	一 -29.52 一 一	一 ^16,56 一	21.22
MAMA-GPT-2XL (ours)	1558M	31.32	17.42	22.39 (+5.62)
Table 3: Compare the quality of mapped facts on Wikidata. #Params ofLM refers to the number of parameters
of the pre-trained LM.
parameters compared to BERTLARGE) contains more knowledge, and MaMa is able to restore the
knowledge. When larger or deeper models (e.g., GPT-3) are used with MaMa, we can expect more
gains of the KG quality. Thanks to the efficient nature of MaMa, which relies only on the forward
pass of the LMs without fine-tuning, the results suggest that MaMa is scalable to large KGs.
Larger corpora embed more complete KGs. In particular, MAMA-GPT-2XL outperforms Stan-
ford OpenIE by 5.6% in F1. MaMa-BERTLARGE outperforms Stanford OpenIE by approximately
4.4% in F1. Both F1 gains are larger compared to that on TAC KBP. This is because that the LMs
contain world knowledge from pre-training corpora, e.g. Wikipedia and Common Crawl. The larger
the textual corpora are, the more knowledge our method is able to recover and match to the knowl-
edge stored in LMs. The finding is particularly important, since we are now able to construct larger
KGs of high quality from scratch when larger datasets are used, such as WebText2 and Common
CraWl(Raffel et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Similar to the observations on TAC KBP, the Preci-
sion is higher compared to recall. Wikidata is not fully built from Wikipedia, MaMa could improve
the recall by running on those larger corPora to collect more facts.
3.2 Analysis of Unmapped Facts
The oPen KG constructed by MaMa is a new tyPe ofKG combining the fixed KG schema with the
flexible oPen schema. We turn to study the quality of the candidate facts that are not maPPed to the
above reference KG schema, but are in the oPen schema generated by MaMa. We manually judge
such unmaPPed facts generated by our best method MaMa-GPT-2XL from 100 samPled documents
in Wikidata and TAC KBP resPectively.
The quality of unmapped facts is verified by human annotators. We find 35.3% of the unmaPPed
facts are true on Wikidata. We find 83.2% of those true facts are Partially unmaPPed facts as defined
in Sec. 2.2.2, e.g., (Bob_Dylan.Q392, tounwith, the_Grateful-Dead.Q212533), whose relation is not
within the schema of Wikidata, while both head and tail are in the schema. The remaining true
facts are completely unmapped facts (Sec. 2.2.2), e.g., a candidate fact (Jacob, was, A Registered
Mennonite) stays the same in the oPen schema.
Accurate entity detection is desired. We also notice 45.5% of the untrue unmapped facts on
Wikidata are due to the incorrect entities detected by the spaCy. Incorrect or missing entity linking
(to either head or tail) in Sec. 2.2.1 causes additional 9.1% errors in the unmapped facts. 4.5% of
the untrue unmapped facts are caused by the missing relation mapping in Sec. 2.2.1. The rest errors
made by MAMA-GPT-2XL are incorrect relation phrases, such as uninformative relation phrases,
e.g., (Dylan, made, his breakthrough), which is similar to the errors made by open IE systems (Fader
et al., 2011). Both entity linking and relation mapping of Map stage rely heavily on the accuracy
of entity detection from the spaCy noun chunk. We conclude that the main root cause of the untrue
unmapped facts is due to the errors made by the spaCy noun chunk.
We observe similar trends on TAC KBP. We plan to leverage crowdsourcing platforms, e.g., Me-
chanical Turk, to conduct quantitative evaluations over the unmapped facts to better understand the
strengths and shortage of MaMa. We plan to identify more accurate entities by relying on attention
weights in LMS (Clark et al., 2019; Hewitt & Manning, 2019) instead of using extra resources. We
will also investigate stronger entity linkers (Kolitsas et al. 2018) and learn a more robust relation
mapping through weak or distant supervision (Mintz et al., 2009.. Ratner et al., 2017). We will in-
vestigate more sophisticated approaches, such as graph neural networks (Kipf & Welling, 2016), to
generate more accurate relation phrases from the attention weight matrices by considering structural
information.
4	Related Work
Knowledge graph construction can be generally categorized into two groups, 1) supervised ap-
proaches. Wikidata, Freebase (Bollacker etal., 2008), YAGO (Suchaneketal., 2007), YAGO2 (Hof-
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
fart et al., 2013), DBPedia (Auer et al., 2007) are built based on human supervision from WikiPedia
infoboxes and other structured data sources; 2) semi-supervised approaches. Open information ex-
traction systems, e.g., OLLIE (Schmitz et al., 2012), Reverb IFader et al., 2011), Stanford Ope-
nIE (Angeli et al., 2015), and OpenIE 5.1 2 aim to leverage carefully-designed patterns based
on linguistic features (e.g., dependencies and POS tags), to extract triplets from web corpora for
open schema KG. Besides, NELL (Carlson et al., 2010), DeepDive (Niu et al., 2012), Knowledge
Vault (DOng et al., 2014) extract information based on a fixed schema or ontology, where humans
help improve the accuracy of the extractions. Probase (WU et al., 2012) produces taxonomies instead
of rich typed relations in general KGs. MaMa instead uses learned knowledge stored in pre-trained
LMs without human supervision to construct an open KG, which is a mixture of fixed schema and
open schema. Different from commonsense knowledge construction using Transformers (Davison
et al., 2019； Bosselut et al., 2019), the proposed method is unsupervised and end-to-end, and con-
structs general-purpose KGs instead of commonsense knowledge.
Language models, e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), GPT 很adford et al., 2018), GPT-2/3 (Radford
et al., 2019； Brown et al., 2020), ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019),
ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and Megatron-
LM (Shoeybi et al., 2019) contain factual knowledge obtained via pre-training on large-scale corpora
such as Wikipedia and BookCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015). Studies have leveraged the pre-trained LMs as
virtual KGs, and show reasonable performance in QA tasks (Dhingra et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020),
and language modeling (Khandelwal et al., 2019). LMs are further enhanced by KGs (Peters et al.,
2019) to improve knowledge-driven tasks. While the existing work utilizes knowledge in an implicit
way, the main difference is that our approach explicitly extracts knowledgeable facts from the LMs.
Compare to the joint training with knowledge base to improve shallow word embedding (Wang
et al., 2014), we show that the knowledge is already stored in the deep LMs. We plan to incorporate
domain knowledge into language models to construct domain-specific KGs. The main difference
between LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019; 2020) and MAMA is mainly two-fold: (1) LAMA aims to
complete Cloze-style statement, e.g., given “Dylan is a _”, LAMA predicts which words/phrases
should fill the blank “_”, which has no direct connection to KGs. There are several fundamental
limitations when adapting LAMA to construct KGs, e.g., additional queries must be constructed
first, and the answers for the queries must be linked to KGs. MaMa aims to solve a reasoning
problem, e.g., given a passage, MAMA directly matches the fact in the form of a triplet (Dylan, is,
songwriter) at the first step, then maps the fact to produce a KG. (2) The benchmark datasets used
with MaMa are larger compared to the LAMA benchmark, e.g., Wikidata is 3 orders of magnitude
larger compared to the largest dataset in the LAMA benchmark.
Neural network interpretation here specifically refers to pre-trained deep language model analysis.
There has been a lot of work to understand what the neural networks learn (Linzen et al., 2016; Adi
et al., 2016; Tenney et al., 2019). With regards to analyzing Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) based
language models (e.g., BERT and GPT-3), substantial recent work focuses on both visualizing and
analyzing the attention (Vig, 2019; Jain & Wallace, 2019; Clark et al., 2019; Michel et al., 2019; Vig
et al., 2020; Ramsauer et al., 2020 Hendrycks et al., 2020). Instead of analyzing or visualizing, we
use LMs to generate structured KGs to directly recover what LMs learn from the corpora.
5	Conclusion
We show that the knowledge graphs can be constructed by a single forward pass of the language
models over textual corpora. We propose a two-stage unsupervised approach MaMa to first match
the facts in the corpus with the internal knowledge of the language model, and then map the matched
facts to produce a knowledge graph. We demonstrate the quality of the resultant open knowledge
graphs by comparing to two knowledge graphs (Wikidata and TAC KBP). The open knowledge
graph also features new facts in the open schema, which could have broad implications for knowl-
edge graphs and their downstream applications. The results also suggest that larger language models
store richer knowledge than existing knowledge graphs, and generating on even larger high-quality
text corpora could continue improving knowledge graphs. Additionally, the knowledge graphs gen-
erated by our approach can help researchers to look into what the language models learn, so our
interpretable knowledge graphs establish a bridge between the deep learning and knowledge graph
communities.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
References
Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. Fine-grained analysis
of sentence embeddings using auxiliary prediction tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04207, 2016.
Gabor Angeli, Melvin Jose Johnson Premkumar, and Christopher D Manning. Leveraging linguistic
structure for open domain information extraction. In ACL, pp. 344-354, 2015.
Soren Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives.
Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In The semantic web, pp. 722-735. 2007.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. Freebase: a collabo-
ratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In SIGMOD, pp. 1247-1250,
2008.
Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chaitanya Malaviya, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Yejin
Choi. Comet: Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05317, 2019.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr Settles, Estevam R Hruschka Jr, and Tom M
Mitchell. Toward an architecture for never-ending language learning. In AAAI, number 3, 2010.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. What does bert look
at? an analysis of bert’s attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341, 2019.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, William W Cohen, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
Joe Davison, Joshua Feldman, and Alexander M Rush. Commonsense knowledge mining from
pretrained models. In EMNLP, pp. 1173-1178, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Manzil Zaheer, Vidhisha Balachandran, Graham Neubig, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and William W Cohen. Differentiable reasoning over a virtual knowledge base. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.10640, 2020.
Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin Murphy, Thomas
Strohmann, Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. Knowledge vault: A web-scale approach to proba-
bilistic knowledge fusion. In KDD, pp. 601-610, 2014.
Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni. Identifying relations for open information
extraction. In EMNLP, pp. 1535-1545, 2011.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
augmented language model pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08909, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representa-
tions. In NAACL, pp. 4129-4138, 2019.
Johannes Hoffart, Fabian M Suchanek, Klaus Berberich, and Gerhard Weikum. Yago2: A spatially
and temporally enhanced knowledge base from wikipedia. Artificial Intelligence, pp. 28-61,
2013.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10186,
2019.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00172,
2019.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Nikolaos Kolitsas, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, and Thomas Hofmann. End-to-end neural entity linking.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07699, 2018.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
cut. ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language representations. CoRR,
abs/1909.11942, 2019.
Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. Assessing the ability of lstms to learn syntax-
sensitive dependencies. TACL, pp. 521-535, 2016.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. CoRR, abs/1907.11692, 2019.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? In NIPS,
pp. 14014-14024, 2019.
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky. Distant supervision for relation extraction
without labeled data. In ACL, pp. 1003-1011, 2009.
Feng Niu, Ce Zhang, Christopher Re, and JUde Shavlik. Elementary: Large-scale knowledge-base
construction via machine learning and statistical inference. International Journal on Semantic
Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), 8(3):42-73, 2012.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP, pp. 1532-1543, 2014.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365,
2018.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Robert L Logan IV, Roy Schwartz, Vidur Joshi, Sameer Singh,
and Noah A Smith. Knowledge enhanced contextual word representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.04164, 2019.
Fabio Petroni, Tim RocktaScheL Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066,
2019.
Fabio Petroni, Patrick Lewis, Aleksandra Piktus, Tim Rocktaschel, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H
Miller, and Sebastian Riedel. How context affects language models’ factual predictions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.04611, 2020.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, (8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. CoRR, abs/1910.10683, 2019.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
HUbert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schafl, Johannes Lehner, PhiliPP Seidl, Michael Widrich, LUkas Gru-
ber, Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlovic, Geir Kjetil Sandve, Victor Greiff, et al. Hopfield
networks is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217, 2020.
Alexander Ratner, Stephen H Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher Re.
Snorkel: RaPid training data creation with weak suPervision. In VLDB, volume 11, PP. 269,
2017.
Michael Schmitz, Stephen Soderland, Robert Bart, Oren Etzioni, et al. Open language learning for
information extraction. In EMNLP, pp. 523-534, 2012.
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan
Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model par-
allelism. arXiv, pp. arXiv-1909, 2019.
Valentin I Spitkovsky and Angel X Chang. A cross-lingual dictionary for english wikipedia con-
cepts. 2012.
Fabian M Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum. Yago: a core of semantic knowledge.
In WWW, pp. 697-706, 2007.
Mihai Surdeanu. Overview of the tac2013 knowledge base population evaluation: English slot filling
and temporal slot filling. TAC, pp. 2, 2013.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. What do you learn from con-
text? probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.06316, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Eukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, pp. 5998-6008, 2017.
Jesse Vig. Visualizing attention in transformerbased language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.02679, 2019.
Jesse Vig, Ali Madani, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Ra-
jani. Bertology meets biology: Interpreting attention in protein language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.15222, 2020.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
understanding systems. In NIPS, pp. 3266-3280, 2019.
Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. Knowledge graph and text jointly
embedding. In EMNLP, pp. 1591-1601, 2014.
Wentao Wu, Hongsong Li, Haixun Wang, and Kenny Q Zhu. Probase: A probabilistic taxonomy
for text understanding. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data, pp. 481-492, 2012.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime G. Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V.
Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding.	CoRR,
abs/1906.08237, 2019.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and
Sanja Fidler. Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching
movies and reading books. In ICCV, pp. 19-27, 2015.
12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
A Additional Details and Analysis of MaMa
A.1 Method Details
Map stage details To evaluate the mapped facts, we first use Match stage of MAMA to run over the
corresponding documents to generate the candidate facts. For Map stage on TAC KBP, we link to
the oracle annotation of the entities or spans in the TAC KBP corpus. On Wikidata, the entity linking
method described in Sec. 2.2.1 is first leveraged to link entities in the candidate facts to WikiPedia
anchors. We build an enhanced mention-to-entity dictionary based on SPitkoVSky & Chang (2012).
In Particular, we add new WikiPedia anchors to the dictionary which results in 26 million entries
comparing to 21 million entries in [Spitkovsky & Chang (2012). Then a Wikipedia anchor to the
Wikidata item dictionary is constructed and used to further link the entities to Wikidata. If the head
or tail is a pronoun, We further use neuralcoref 4 for coreference resolution. We use GloVe (Pen-
nington et al., 2014) embedding for disambiguation. The relation mapping is constructed offline for
TAC KBP and Wikidata respectively using the method in Sec. 2.2.1. Besides the automatic relation
mapping method proposed in ∣Angeli et al. (2015), we manually check whether the top relation
phrases are true as described in Sec. 2.2.1. For relation mapping, we randomly sampled a hold-out
dataset including 2,000 documents from the TAC KBP corpus and English Wikipedia for the rela-
tion mapping construction on TAC KBP and Wikidata respectively. For oracle facts in Wikidata, we
only preserve those facts describing relations between entities that could be linked to corresponding
Wikipedia anchors. We rule out facts of attributes about entities and facts of auxiliary relations (such
as topic’s main category.P901) and finally results in 27,368,562 oracle facts.
Implementation details For Wikidata, at Match stage, we randomly split the English Wikipedia
data into 20 partitions, and map the data partitions to 20 distributed servers to run. Each server is
configured with four Tesla K80 12Gs. We set the max sequence length to 256, and batch size as 32
for MaMa-BERTLARGE and 4 for MaMa-GPT-2XL . We use implementations of pre-trained LMs
in Transformers package 5. We use spaCy sentencizer 6 to segment the documents into sentences.
MaMa-BERTLARGE takes approximately 48 hours, and MaMa-GPT-2XL costs around 96 hours.
The resulting candidate facts of Match stage from the 20 servers are then reduced a data server,
where a MongoDB database is maintained to store the oracle Wikidata and entity linking results to
enable the efficient Map stage. To produce the open KGs, Map stage takes around 18 hours. The
setup is similar to TAC KBP. Match stage is done within 48 hours for all the settings. The batch sizes
of MaMa-BERTBASE, MaMa-GPT-2, MaMa-GPT-2MEDIUM, MaMa-GPT-2LARGE are 64, 32,
16, 8 respectively.
Parameter settings The parameter settings are shared across TAC KBP and Wikidata. All the
choices are based on the parameter study in Sec. A.3. The beam size of Algorithm 1 is set to 6. The
matching degree threshold of Constraint #1 (Sec. 2.1.2) is set to 0.005, and the number of distinct
head-tail pairs of Constraint #2 (Sec. 2.1.2) is set to 10. To generate the attention weight matrix As
of a sentence, we reduce the weights of every attention head in the last layer of pre-trained LMs
using the mean operator.
A.2 Error Analysis
There is still significant room to improve MaMa. To further understand the shortage of MaMa,
we conduct an error analysis of the errors in precision (i.e., incorrect facts returned by MaMa) of
Table 2 and Table 3, We choose our best method MAMA-GPT-2xl for the study. We sample 100
documents from the Wikidata dataset, and manually check the reasons for the errors. We find 33.1%
of the errors are caused by incorrect entities, while the relation phrases are correct. The errors are
due to the incorrect noun chunk detected by the spaCy 7. 18.3% of the errors are due to the missing
relation mapping created in Sec. 2.2.1. Note that we find approximately 23.8% of the errors are
actually correct facts that are new in the reference KGs. e.g., (Bob-Dylan.Q392, residence.P551,
Nashville.Q23l97) (in Figure 16) is not an existing fact in Wikidata, but it is a correct mapped fact
based on our annotation. The rest errors made by MAMA-GPT-2xL are incorrect relation phrases,
4
5
6
https://github.com/huggingface/neuralcoref
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
https://spacy.io/api/sentencizer
https://spacy.io/usage/linguiStiC-features/#noun-chunks
13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
32
31
S 30
29 29
”8
27 27
26
25
(d) Attention weights layers.
Figure 3: Parameter study With MAMA-BERTBASE on TAC KBP hold-out subset.
(e) Attention weights reduction.
Max Mean
such as uninformative relation phrases. We find similar errors are made by MAMA-GPT-2xl on
TAC KBP. Similar to Sec. 3.2, enhancing the entity detection, entity linker, relation mapping, and
relation generation are helpful. We also plan to leverage lifelong learning (Carlson et al., 2010) to
add true facts to the reference KGs to improve the evaluation.
A.3 Parameter Study
We study the effects of the parameters using MaMa-BERTBASE on TAC KBP. We randomly sample
20% of the oracle query entities as a hold-out dataset to tune the parameters, and use the best
parameter setting achieved for both TAC KBP and Wikidata experiments. When studying the effect
of a certain parameter, we keep the remaining parameters as default described in Sec. A.1, We use
F1 to measure the effects.
Effects of beam size Figure 3(a) illustrates the effects of various beam sizes in Algorithm 1. We
find that in general, the larger the beam size is, the better F1 the setting achieves. This is because
that MaMa is able to reserve more potentially correct facts when more candidates are allowed in
the Match stage. However, F1 improvement gradually becomes subtle, while the computation costs
increase more significantly. For sake of the efficiency, we do not explore larger beam sizes. We set
the beam size as 6.
Effects of search constraints Figure 3(b) compares the effect of different thresholds of the match-
ing degree of Constraint #1 in Sec. 2.1.2. We set the threshold as 0.005 since it achieves the best
result. Note that the summed attention score is normalized by the length of the fact to penalize
the cumbersome facts. The matching degree threshold is effective, which is mainly because of the
knowledge contained in the self-attention matrix. The score in the attention matrix is representing
the chance of the facts to be the true facts based on the stored knowledge. Figure 3(c) shows the
impact of the number of distinct head-tail pairs in identifying common relations of Constraint #2
in Sec. 2.1.2. The best result is achieved when it equals 10. This shows that while MaMa mostly
identifies frequent relations, it is also able to capture some rare relations for the open schema.
Effects of attention weights Figure 3(d) shows the comparison between attention weights of the
last layer and the mean of all layers. The attention weights of the last layer perform better. This is
due to the attention weights in lower layers are low-level linguistic knowledge according to (Clark
et al., 2019; Ramsauer et al., 2020), which are less relevant to the factual knowledge for the KG
construction. Figure 3(e) compares the impact of different attention reduction, i.e., mean, max, over
the attention heads of the last layer. We find the “mean” perform better. The reason is that the token
often intensively attends to several specific tokens in the sequence (Michel et al., 2019), and the
“mean” operator is more sensitive to such information.
14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
B	Samples from MaMa on TAC KBP
B.1	Mapped Facts
We randomly sample 100 documents from TAC KBP corpus, then randomly sample sentences from
those documents. The uncurated candidate facts and the corresponding mapped facts of the sam-
pled sentences based on our best methods MaMa-BERTLARGE and MaMa-GPT-2XL are shown
in Figure 4 and Figure 5 respectively. We also randomly sample several sentences in which MAMA-
BERTLARGE differs from MaMa-GPT-2XL in the resulting facts for comparison, which is illus-
trated in Figure 6. In each table, “ID” represents the document ID of a sampled sentence in TAC
KBP corpus. “Sentence” indicates the sampled sentence. “Candidate facts to mapped facts” col-
umn contains the candidate facts (on the left side of “→") and their corresponding mapped facts (on
the right side of "T)
B.2	Unmapped Facts
We randomly sample 100 documents from TAC KBP corpus. From those documents, we show
unmapped facts from the sampled sentences from those documents. We manually check the correct-
ness of the unmapped facts according to Sec. 3.2, and show the correct ones. The original candi-
date facts with the corresponding unmapped facts of the sampled sentences generated by MaMa-
BERTLARGE and MAMA-GPT-2xl are shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8, A further comparison of
the unmapped candidate facts is illustrated in Figure9. In each table, "ID” represents the document
ID of a sampled sentence in TAC KBP corpus. “Sentence” indicates the sampled sentence. “Can-
didate facts to unmapped facts" column contains the candidate facts (on the left side of “→'') and
their corresponding unmapped facts (on the right side of "→”).
C Samples from MaMa on Wikidata
C.1 Mapped Facts
Similar to TAC KBP, we randomly sample 100 documents from the Wikidata corpus (i.e., English
Wikipedia), then randomly sample sentences from those documents. The uncurated candidate facts
and the corresponding mapped facts of the sampled sentences based on our best methods MaMa-
BERTLARGE and MAMA-GPT-2xl are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11 respectively. We also
randomly sample several sentences in which MaMa-BERTLARGE differs from MaMa-GPT-2XL
in the resulting facts for comparison, which is illustrated in Figure 12, In each table, "ID" repre-
sents the Wikipedia page’s title of a sampled sentence. "Sentence” indicates the sampled sentence.
“Candidate facts to mapped facts” column contains the candidate facts (on the left side of "→")
and their corresponding mapped facts (on the right side of "→”).
C.2 Unmapped Facts
Similar to TAC KBP, we randomly sample 100 documents from the Wikidata corpus. From those
documents, we show unmapped facts from several sampled sentences from those documents. We
manually check the correctness of the unmapped facts according to Sec. 3.2, and show the correct
ones. The original candidate facts with the corresponding unmapped facts of the sampled sentences
generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE and MAMA-GPT-2xl are shown in Figure 13 and Figure 14.
A further comparison of the unmapped candidate facts is illustrated in Figure 15. In each table,
"ID” represents the Wikipedia page’s title ofa sampled sentence. "Sentence” indicates the sampled
sentence. "Candidate facts to unmapped facts” column contains the candidate facts (on the left
side of “→") and their corresponding unmapped facts (on the right side of "→”).
D Additional Open KG Subgraphs from MaMa on Wikidata
We sample several documents from the Wikidata corpus. We visualize the mapped facts and un-
mapped facts from those documents as examples of subgraphs in the resulting open KGs. We show
the snapshots of the subgraphs generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from Figure 16 to Figure 24. We
15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts
SF13-ENG-001	Bashardost left Pakistan for France in1981 .	(BaShardost, left, Pakistan) → (Ramazan Bashardost, per:counties_of_residence,	Pakistan)
SF13-ENG-004	" DOUglaS Flint will succeed Stephen Green	as	Group	Chairman and	Stuart	Gulliver	will	be	appointed	Group Chief EXecUtve ,	(DoUglaS Flmt, as, Group Chairman) →	(DoUglaS FIinI peκ,Ue, Chairman)
following Michael Geoghegan ’ s decision to retire early next year , ” HSBC said in a statement .
SF13-ENG-007	Mohammed Tantawi, head OfAl - Azhar University	, told a School艮rl	to remove her niqab	when he	Spotted her during a tour	of an	(Mohammed Tantawi, head of,Al-Azhar University) → (MohammedSayed Tantawi, per:employee_or_member_of, Al-Azhar Uni-
Al - Azhar affiliated school , the independent Al - Masry al - Youm newspaper reported this week .	versity)
SF13_ENG_009	He took officem2006 by defeaHnglongIme incumbent Anwar Chowdhry Irom Pakistan, who WaSlater barred for alle^d financial	(Longime Incumbent Anwar Chowdhry, Irom, Pakistan) → (Anwar Chowdhry, per:ori艮n, Pakistan)
corruption.
SF13-ENG-010	In addition to his wife , Wendy , Dio is survived by son Daniel , g,andchddren Julie and Joey , and fa&er Pat.	(Dio, is survived by son, Daniel) → (Ronnie James Dio, per:children, Daniel)
SF13-ENG-011	Marshall is charged wi⅛ g,and larceny and fraud and faces up to 25 years in PriSonifConviCted.	(Marshall, is charged, Fraud) → (An&ony MarShall,per:Char鲜，fraud)
SF13-ENG-011	Marshall, a Tony Award - winningBroadway producer and former U.S. diplomat, sat stonelike	as &e jury forewoman read each	(Marshall,,, A Tony Award-Winning Broadway Producer) → (An⅛ony Marshall, per:UUe, producer)
verdict aloud , the word ” guilty ” clearly resonating in the otherwise silent courtroom .
SF13-ENG-011	The blueblood scion of one ofAmerica' S mostilluslrious families appeared to lisUn impassively	as verdicts finding hm guJty on	(Him, gjilty, Grand Larceny) → (An⅛ony Marshall, per:charges, g,andlarceny)
14 counts of grand larceny , conspiracy and fraud were read to a packed courtroom .
SF13-ENG_011	ButMarshall 'sson, Philip ,told a different story.	(Marshall'S Son,,, Philip) → (An&onyMarshall,per:Children,Phibp)
SF13-ENG-012	Al - Qaeda 's American spokesman Adam Gadahn, also known as Azzam &e American, called on MUSbmS in &e West on Sunday	(Adam Gadahn, also known, Azzam) → (Adam Gadahn, per:aItemate_names, Azzam)
to carry out more attacks like the deadly shooting at the US base in Fort Hood , TeXas .
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn, also known asAzzam &e American, was born in 1978 .	(Gadahn,, also known as, AzZam) → (Adam Gadahn, per:aIternate_names, AzZam)
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn g,ew up in Cabforria andconverted to Islam before he moved to	Pakistan in 1998	and attended an al -	Qaida IrainingCamP	(Gadahn, in, Cabfornia) → (Adam Gadahn, per:staUsorprovinceSLof_residence, California)
siX years later , according to media reports .
SF13_ENG_012	Gadahn moved to Pakistan in 1998 , accordingto &eFBI, and is said to have attended an al - Qaida training camp SK years laUr,	(Gadahn, moved to, Pakistan) → (Adam Gadahn, per:count,ieSL.of_residence, Pakistan)
serving as a translator and consultant for the group .
SF13-ENG-014	After &e Munich attack ,he lived in Lebanon , Jordan and several EaStem EUropeanCoUntrieS, where he hadclose Ues to Commu-	(He, lived in, Lebanon) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:CoUntrieS-of-residence, Lebanon)
nist bloc intelligence agencies .
SF13-ENG-015	Clifton attended Howard University but left before g,aduatingto pursue poetry.	(Clifton, attended, Howard University) → (Lucille Clifton, per:sChoolS-attended, Howard University)
SF13-ENG-017	" Alexander Haigdevotedhis career to serving our CoUntry ,both as a soldier and as a diplomat," AIbnat said. ”	(Alexander Haig, devotedhis, soldier) → (Alexander Haig, per:title, soldier)
SF13-ENG-017	In 1979, he resided and reta,⅛d from the Army .	(He, and reta,⅛d from, The Army) → (Alexander Haig, per:employee_or_member_of, Army)
SF13-ENG-019	MCGregor is survived byhis wife , Lori, and four children , dau呼ters Jordan, Taylor and Landri, and a son, Logan .	(MCgegor, his wife, Lolri) → (Keli MCGregor, per:spouse, Lolri)
SF13-ENG-020	” Mikewas a first - rate journalist, a valued member of our staff for 25 years andwe will miss him, " Tmes Editor Russ Stanton	(Mike, was, A First-Rate Journalist) → (Mike Penner, per:title, first-rate journalist)
Said.”_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SF13_ENG_020	Penner is survived by his brother, John, a copy editor at ⅛e Times, and his former wife , Times SportSWriter Lisa Dillman .	(Penner, his brother ,, John) → (Mike Penner, per:siblings, John)
SF13-ENG_024	Shewaschargsdwiththeftm Beaumont ,Texas, for allegedlyfailingtopayfor $ 10,000 worth ofdentalworkin 2006 .	(She, was charged, Theft) → (Crystal Taylor, per:charges, ⅛eft)
SF13_ENG_025	Michigan native Nancy Kissel WaSConviCted of murder and SentenCedin HongKong'	S Hi呼 Court in September	2005 .	(Michigan Natve Nancy Kissel, WaSConviCted, Murder) → (Nancy Kissel, per:charges, murder)
SF13_ENG_026	Neal returned to New York andconcent,at⅛d on stage work.	(Neal, returned to, New York) → (Patricia Neal, per:statesorprovmces-of-residence, New York)
SF13_ENG_026	In1953 , she married Roald Dahl ,the BriHShWriter famed for ” Charlie and&e Chocolate Factory," ” James and&e Giant Peach	(She, married, Roald Dahl) → (PatriCiaNeal, per:spouse, Roald Dahl)
” and other tales for children .
SF13_ENG_026	Oscar -WinnmgaCtreSS Patticia Neal has died of lung cancer at her home onMartha ' s Vineyard, Massachusetts , on Sunday.	(Patticia, died of, LungCancer) → (PattlCiaNeal,per:CaUSe_of_dea&, lung cancer)
SF13_ENG_027	Al - Hakim ' S son, Ammar al - Hakim , has beengIoomed for months to takehis father' s place .	(Al-Hakim'S Son, ,,Ammar Al-Hakim) → (Abdul AziZ Al-Hakim, per:Children, Ammar al-Hakim)
SF13_ENG_027	Al - Hakim is the head of SUpreme Iraqi Islamic Council (SIIC ), ⅛elargest Shiite party in Iraq.	(Al-Hakim, is, SUpreme Iraqi Islamic Council) → (Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, per:employee_or_member_of,	Supreme Iraqi Islamic
Council)
SF13_ENG_027	His former ShJJte partners have gathered again to form &ar own g,oup , the Iraqi National Alliance (	INA ), which includes the	(Al-Hakim,, who diedin, Iran) → (Abdul AziZ Al-Hakim, per:CoUntry-of_dea&, Iran)
influential Supreme Iraqi Islamic Council ( SIIC ) of Ammar al - Hakim , who succeeded his father Abdul Aziz al - Hakim , who
died in a hospital in Iran last month after a long battle with cancer .
SF13_ENG_028	” I ' d rather have Sully doing this than some stranger , or some hotshot trying to be the next Billy Mays , " said the gjy who	(The Next Billy Mays, his son, BillyMays Iii) → (BiUy Mays, per:ChjJdren, BillyMays III)
actually is the next Billy Mays , his son Billy Mays III .
SF13_ENG_029	H映on ContJmed cycling during and after a SUnt in the Army , and drew attention in the early 1980s when he managed to keep up	(Fi映on, during and after a SUntin, The Army) → (Laurent H映on, per:employee_or_member_of, the Army)
With Hinaultduringa race in which amateurs and professionals rode together.
SF13_ENG_029	Laurent Patrick Fi映onwas born in Paris onAug. 12,1960 .	(Laurent PatriCk H映on, was born in, Pans) → (Laurent H映on, per:city_of_birth, Paris)
SF13_ENG_030	Anderson became the Tigers ' manager in June 1979 and built on a foundation that included Alan Trammell at shortstop	, Lou	(Anderson, became, The Tigers' Manager) → (Sparky Anderson, per`tle, manager)
Whitaker at second base , Kirk Gibson in the outfield and Jack Morris on the pitching staff .
SF13_ENG_030	In addition to his wife , Carol , Andersonis survived byhis sons, Lee and Albert; his dau呼ter, Shirlee Enmebrecht; and many	(Anderson, is survived byhis sons, Lee) → (Sparky Anderson, per:children, Albert)
grandchildren.
SF13_ENG_031	Blake Edwards, a Writer and director who was ha∏ed as a Hollywood master of screwball farces and rude comedies like ” Victor /	(Blake Edwards,,, Writer) → (Blake Edwards, per:title, Writer)
Victoria ” and the ” Pink Panther ” movies , died Wednesday night in Santa Monica , Calif . He was 88 .
SF13_ENG_032	Hwang, who lives in Seoul under ti^t police security , has Written books and delivered speeches condemning Kim ' S re⅛me as	(Hwang, who lives, Seoul) → (Hwang Jang-Yop, per:ciUes_of_residence, Seoul)
authoritarian and dictatorial .
SF13_ENG_035	Kaczynska , who was 67 , married Kaczynski in 1978 after meeting him in the northern PobSh city of Gdansk , where they were	(KaCZynska, married, Kaczynski) → (Maria KaCZynska, per:spouse, Kaczynski)
both academics .
SF13_ENG_036	Uponhis release he went into exile in India , where he masterminded &e 1973 hijacking of aRoyal Nepal Airlines plane known to	(His Release, exile, India) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:CoUntrieS-of-residence, India)
be carrying hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash to fund his banned Nepali Congress party .
SF13_ENG_036	Koirala began his PobHCaI career as a union organiser and was imprisoned for seven years in 1960 after a failed uprising against	(KoUIala, began his, A Union Organiser) → (Ginja Prasad Koirala, per:UUe, union or算niser)
the monarchy .
SF13_ENG_036	Koiralawas born in 1925 in Bihar of India where his father Krishna Prasad Koirala and his family were living m exile.	(Kou,ala, was born in 1925 in, Bihar) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:city_of_birt^, Bihar)
SF13_ENG_036	Koiralawas bom in1925 in B⅛ar of IndiaatthetmewhenhiS father Krishna Prasad Koirala along wi⅛his family was exiled by	(Kou,ala, was born in 1925 in, Bihar) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:city_of_birt^, Bihar)
Rana rulers.
SF13_ENG_037	Chabrol' S survivors also include his ⅛ird wife , Aurore Pajot, who acted as his script supervisor on nearly all ofhis movies from	(Chabrol'S Survivors, ⅛irdwife, Aurore Pajot) → (Claude Chabrol, per:spouse, Aurore	Pajot)
1968 on and whom he married in 1981 ; and Pajot ' s daughter , Cecile Maistre , who was an assistant director on his films and
WrotethescnptWithhimfoLThe Girl CUtinTwo "( 2007 ).
SF13_ENG_038	The jomt statement said CUnnm呼am was ” an inspiring performer and dancer into his 80s , and a visionary ChoreogIapher	and	(Cunnin呼am, was ”, An InSpinngPerformer) → (MerCe CUnnm呼am, per:,te, performer)
dedicated teacher throughout his life , he led quietly and by example , ” the statement said . ”
SF13_ENG_038	Merce Cunnin呼am, the nonagenarianchoreog,apher, is planning for a world Without him .	(Merce Cunnin呼am,,, The Nonagenarian ChoreogIapher) → (MerCe CUnnin呼am, per:,te, ChoreogIapher)
SF13_ENG_039	Acourt on Monday clear⅛d⅛e widower of BritishrealityteleviSion star Jade Goody , who died ofcancer last year , ofrape .	(BriUshRealityTelevisionStar Jade, who died, Cancer) → (JadeGoody,per:CaUSe-of-death, CanCer)
SF13_ENG_041	Don Hewitt, theCBS newsman who invented &e hi驻ly popular TV newsmagazine "60 Minutes ” and produced it for 36 years,	(Don Hewitt, ,,The Cbs Newsman) → (Don Hewitt, per:UUe, newsman)
died WedneSday.____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SF13_ENG_041	” He was Meconsummate television newsman, " Don Hewitt, a longime CBS News executive and creator of belong - running ”	(Don Hewitt, ,,executive) → (Don Hewitt, per:,te, executive)
60 MinUtes” news prog,am, told ReUterS. ”
SF13_ENG_041	Hewitt was already a hi甜y respected TV newsman .	(Hewitt, was, A Higily ReSpected Tv Newsman) → (Don Hewitt, per:,te, TV newsman)
SF13-ENG_041	DonaldShepard Hewittwas bornin New York onDec.14,1922, andgrewup m ⅛e suburb ofNew Rochelle .	(DonaId Shepard Hewitt, born, NeW York) → (Don HeWitt,peπstateorprovince-of-bu⅛, NeW York)
SF13-ENG_043	EIeanor LoUiSe GreenWiChWaSbornin BrookIyn on OCt. 23,1940.	(Eleanor LolUiSe Greenwich, WaS born, Oct.) → (EIlie Greenwich, per:date-of-birth,1940-10-23)__________________________
SF13_ENG_044	A litte more than a year after Dunne died from bladder cancer , the colorful remnants ofhis estate have been ConSi映ed by his	(Dunne, died, Bladder Cancer) → (Dominick Dunne, per:CaUSe-of_dea&, bladder cancer)
family to Stair Galleries in Hudson , N . Y . , which will auction them Nov . 20 .
SF13_ENG_048	Charles Gwathmey, an architect known for his influential modernist home desi映S and famous clients like director StevenSpielberg	(Charles Gwathmey,,, architect) → (Charles Gwathmey, per:title, architect)
, has died .
SF13_ENG_049	Besides hiswife, Mandelbrotis Survivedbytwo sons, Laurent, ofParis, and Didier, ofNewton, Mass., and th,eeg,andchildren	(Mandelbrot, is survived by two sons,, Laurent) → (BenoitMandelbrot, per:children, Laurent)
SF13_ENG_049	For years, he worked for IBM in New York .	(He, for, Ibm) → (BenoitMandelbrot, per:employee_or_member_of, IBM)
SF13_ENG_049	After several years Spentlargely at the Centre National dela Recherche ScienUfique in Paris, Mandelbrot was hired by IBMin1958 (Mandelbrot, was hired by, Ibm) → (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:employee_or_member_of, IBM)
to work at the Thomas J . Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights , N . Y . Although he worked frequently with academic
researchers and served as a visiting professor at Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , it was not until 1987 that
he began to teach at Yale , where he earned tenure in 1999 .
SF13_ENG_056	" It's anissue for everybody in the State because peanuts are a big part of our economy , " said Don Koehler , executive director	(The Geor⅛a Peanut Commission, director, Don Koehler) → (Geor⅛a Peanut Commission, org:top_members_employees, Don
ofthe Georgia Peanut Commission . ”	Koehler)
SF13_ENG_060	" We ' ll be meeting with scientists , UniVerSity and science policy officials to explore practical opportunities for exchan^ and	(The Aaas President,,, AgIe) → (American Association for the Advancement of Science, org:top_members_employees, Peter C.
collaboration , ” Agre , the AAAS president , was quoted as saying .	Agre)
SF13_ENG_060	However, Alan Leaner , chiefexecutive officer of⅛e AmericanAssociation for ⅛e Advancement of Science , not⅛d that Nobels	(The American Association, chief executive, Alan Leshner) → (American Association for the Advancement of Science,
are generally ⅛ven for work&at' S a decade old or more , and&at &eU . S. mu知 ' tbecome complacent.	org:top _members_employees, Alan Leshner)
SF13_ENG_062	” Fu,st of all, they never have enou呼 fUndmg, " said Andy Kunz, president of&eU.S. Hi呼 Speed Rail Association , a nonprofit	(The U.S. Hi呼 Speed Rail Association,,, Andy Kunz) → (U.S. Hi呼 Speed Rail Association, org:top_member£_employees, Andy
that advocates a national high - speed rail network . ”	Kunz)
SF13_ENG_064	China ' S shock at NATO ' S military Campai映 in&e former YUgoSlaVia helped prod Beijing into playing a bigger role in U . N .	(The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, director of, BateS Gill) → (Stockholm International Peace Research InsU-
peacekeeping, SaidBateS Gill, director of the Stockholm International Peace Research InSttUte and co - author of arecentreport tute, org:top _members_employees, BateS Gill)
on China ' s peacekeeping activities .
SF13_ENG_064	” Non - State actors , for example , a small g,oup of PirateS off the coast of Somalia , Al Qaida and Taliban who operate across (The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, director, BateS Gill) → (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
borders and have more and more SophiStiCatedmeanS of violence , are becoming bigger and bigger cha∏enges to the international	org:top _members_employees, BateS Gill)
system , ” said Bates Gill , director ofthe Stockholm International Peace Research Institute .
SF13_ENG_068	” It is not SUrpnSmg that one primarily CoSmeHC business is trying to th,ow another under the bus by transferring a tax from rich (The Indoor TanningASSoCiaHon,director of, John Overstreet) → (Indoor Tanning Association, org:top_membersi_employees, John
doctors and their wealthy customers to struggling small businesses , ” John Overstreet , director ofthe Indoor Tanning Association Overstreet)
, said in a statement Saturday .
SF13_ENG_076	The ChaUIman of the Swiss Bankers Association , Patrick Odier, told weekly NZZ am Sonntag that Italy and RanCe have shown (The Swiss Bankers Association,,, Patrick Odier) → (Swiss Bankers Association, org:top_membersi_employees, Patrick Odier)
interest in deals like ones Switzerland signed this week with Germany and Britain .
SF13_ENG_076	The majority ofvotersin Switzerland, which manages more than 25 percent of&eworld' S forei映-heldprivate WeaIth , support	(The Swiss Bankers Association, in, Basel) → (Swiss Bankers Association, org:city_of_headquarters, Basel)
banking secrecy , according to a survey published last month by the Swiss Bankers Association in Basel .
SF13_ENG_078	” Americans have a π^t to know the ,u& - - Islam is a reli⅛on of intolerance and violence , " said Richard Thompson , le算l	(The Thomas More Law Center, in, AnnArbor) → (ThomaS More Law Center, org:city_of_headquarte,s, Ann Arbor)
director ofthe Thomas More Law Center in Ann Arbor . ”
SF13_ENG_082	New solutions maybe enacted for these orphans, &ou呼,said Mary Robinson, CEO of the National Council for Adoption.	(The National Council,,, Mary Robinson) → (National Council for Adoption, org:top_membersi_employees, MaryRobinson)
SF13_ENG_082	"When you close a CoUntry, youend up Causingmoreproblems ⅛an you prevented, " said Chuck Johnson , CEO of&eNaHonal	(Adoption, Council for, Chuck Johnson) → (National CoUnCU for Adoption, org:top _members_employees, Chuck Johnson)
Council for Adoption . ”
SF13_ENG_084	"Thisis definitely a Goldilocks problem, " said Jason Grumet, president of the Bipartisan Policy Center and an energy adviser to	(The Bipartisan Policy Center,,, Jason Grumet) → (Bipartisan Policy Center, org:top_members_employees, Jason Grumet)
the Obama campaign last year .
SF13_ENG_085	" Banks are in strong need for the capital markets ( to raise funds ) , " Li Fuan , a director at the China Banking RegJIatory	(The China Banking RegJIatory Commission, director at, Li Fuan) → (China Banking RegJIatory Commission,
Commission ,was quoted as Saymg at a forum over the weekend .	org:top_members_employees, Li Fuan)
SF13_ENG_089	RIANoVoSU and InterfaXCiteAnatoly Isaikin,head ofRosoboronexport, as SayingThursday "no⅛ingisblocking⅛econtinuation	(Rosoboronexport, head of, Anatoly Isa⅛in) → (Rosoboronexport, org:top_membersi_employees, Anatoly Isaikin)
of military - technical cooperation " with Iran .
SF13_ENG_089	Rosoboronexport is the onlycompanyin RUSSiathat is allowed to export arms, dual - use products and military - related services.	(Rosoboronexport, is the onlycompanyin, Russia) → (Rosoboronexport, orgcountry-of-headquarters, Russia)
SF13_ENG_091	Wi&hiS wife, Comebe , Middelhoff invested money in 2000 and 2001 with Esch in funds that were formed to buy five properties	(Arcandor,,, Karstadttquelle) → (Arcandor, org:aIternate-names, KarstadtQuelle)
from KarstadtQuelle , as Arcandor was then known , and leased back to the department store chain before Middelhoff joined the
company , according to Middelhoff ' s spokesman .
SF13_ENG_091	Arcandor' S mail - order subsidiary Quelleisin worse shape however, Klaus - Hubert Goerg told a press conference in the WeStern	(Arcandor,,, Essen) → (Arcandor, org:city_of_headquarUrs, Essen)
city of Essen , where Arcandor is based .
Figure 4:	Mapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE on TAC KBP.
similarly illustrate the snapshots of the subgraphs constructed by MAMA-GPT-2xl from Figure 25
to Figure 32, In each figure, the blue node and arrow represent the mapped facts in the Wikidata
schema, while the yellow node and arrow denote the unmapped facts in the open schema. We addi-
tionally visualize the correct facts that are new in Wikidata according to Sec. A.2 in yellow.
16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts
SF13-ENG-001	BUtm a sign OfjUsthOW disenchanted someAfghans have becomewiththar government, Bashardost, a doctoral scholar who lived in France for two decades, is widely believed to be at least fourth in popularity among 42 candidates in the August elections.	(Bashardost, ,, A Doctoral Scholar) → (Ramazan Bashardost, per:title, scholar)
SF13-ENG 001	BashardOStleft Paklstan for France in1981.	(Bashardost, left, Pakistan) → (Ramazan Bashardost, per:COUnttles of_residence, Pakistan)
SF13-ENG-007	Mohammed Tantawi, head of Al-Azhar University, told a school艮rl to remove her niqab when he spotted her duπng a tour of an Al-Azhar affiliated school, the independent Al-Masry al-YoUm newspaper reported this week.	(MOhammed Tantawi, head, Al-Azhar University) → (MOhammed Sayed Tantawi, per:employee_or_member_of, Al-Azhar Uni- versity)
SF13-ENG-009	He took office in 2006 by defeaUnglongime incumbent Anwar Chowdhry from Pakislan,who Waslater baπ,ed for a∏egedfinancial corrUption.	(Longtime Incumbent Anwar Chowdhry, from, Pakistan) → (Anwar Chowdhry, per:origin, Pakistan)
SF13-ENG 010	In addiUon to his wil⅛, Wendy, Dio is survived by son Daniel, g,andchildren JuUe and Joey, and fa&er Pat.	(Dio, is survived by son, Daniel) → (Ronnie James Dio, per:children, Daniel)
SF13-ENG-011	Marshall is charged wi⅛g,andlarceny and fraud and faces up to 25 years in PrisOnif COnviCted.	(Marshall, with, Fraud) → (Anthony Marshall, per:charges, fraud)
SF13-ENG-011	Marshall, a Tony AWard-Wmning Broadway producer and former U.S. diplomat, sat stonelike as Ihe jury forewoman read each verdict aloud, the word ”guilty” clearly resonating in the otherwise silent courtroom.	(Marshall, ,, producer) → (Anthony Marshall, per:title, producer)
SF13-ENG-011	The blueblood scion of one ofAmerica,s most illust,ious families appeared to listen impassively as verdicts finding himgJilty on 14 counts ofgrand larceny, conspiracy and fraud were read to a packed courtroom.	(Him, guilty on, Grand Larceny) → (Anthony Marshall, per:charges, grand larceny)
SF13-ENG-011	BUtMarshall's son, PhjJiP,told a different story.	(Marshall'S Son, ,, Philip) → (Anthony Marshall, per:children, Philip)
SF13-ENG-012	Al-Qaeda,s American spokesman Adam Gadahn, also known as Azzam &e American, called on Muslims in &e West on Sunday to carry out more attacks like the deadly shooting at the US base in Fort Hood, Texas.	(Adam Gadahn,, also known, AzZam) → (Adam Gadahn, per:aItemate-names, AzZam)
SF13-ENG 012	Gadahn, also known as Azzam ⅛e American, was born in 1978.	(Gadahn, also known as, Azzam) → (Adam Gadahn,per:aIternatenames, AzZam)
SF13-ENG-012	GadahnmeWUP in California and COnverted to IslambefOre he moved to Pakistan in 1998 and attended an al-Qaidat,ainingcamp six years later, according to media reports.	(Gadahn, in, CabfOrnia) → (Adam Gadahn, per:staUsorprovincesLOf_residence, California)
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn moved to Pakistan in 1998, according to &e FBI, and is said to have attended an al-Qaida IrainingCamP six years later, serving as a translator and consultant for the group.	(Gadahn, movedto, Pakistan) → (Adam Gadahn, per:COUntries-ofresidence, Pakistan)
SF13-ENG-014	After ⅛e Munich attack,helivedin Lebanon, Jordan and several EasternEUrOPeanCOUnltles,wherehe hadcloseUes to Communist bloc intelligence agencies.	(He, lived in, Lebanon) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:COUntries-of-residence, Lebanon)
SF13-ENG-015	Clifton attended Howard University but left before g∙aduaHngtO pursue poet,y.	(Clifton, attended, Howard University) → (Lucille Clifton, per：schools_attended, Howard University)
SF13-ENG-017	“Alexander HaigdeVOted his career to serving our county, bo& as a soldier and as adiplomat,” Albri呼t said. ”	(Alexander Haig, as, soldier) → (Alexander Haig, per:title, soldier)
SF13-ENG-017	In 1979,he resided and retired fromtheArmy.	(He, resided and, The Army) → (Alexander Haig, per:employee_or_member_of, Army)
SF13-ENG 019	McGregor is survived byhis wife, Lori, and four children, dauφters Jordan, Taylor and Landri, and a son, L。算n.	(Mcgregor, by his wife, Lori) → (Keli McGregor, per:spouse, Lori)
SF13-ENG-020	'iMikewas a first-rate journalist, a valued member of our staff for 25 years andwe will miss him,” Times Editor Russ Stanton said. ”	(Mike, was, A First-Rate Journalist) → (Mike Penner, per:title, first-rate journalist)
SF13-ENG-020	Penner is survived by his brother, John, acopy editor at&e Times, and his former wife, Tmes sportswηte, Lisa Dillman.	(Penner, by his brother, John) → (Mike Penner, per:siblings, John)
SF13_ENG_024	She was charged wi⅛ theft m Beaumont, Texas, for allegedly failingto pay for $10,000 worth Ofdental work in 2006.	(She, was charged with, Theft) → (Crystal Taylor, per:charges, theft)
SF13-ENG 025	Michigan native Nancy Kissel WasCOnviCted of murder and SentenCedin HongKong,s Hi呼 Court in September 2005.	(Michigan Native Nancy Kissel, convicted of, Murder) → (Nancy Kissel, per:charges, murder)
SF13-ENG-026	Neal returned to New York andconcentated on stage work.	(Neal, returned, New York) → (PatriCia Neal, per:staUsorprovinces_of_residence, New York)
SF13-ENG-026	In 1953, she married Roald Dahl, the BnHshWnter famed for 'Charlie and &e Chocolate Factory,” “James and &e Giant Peach” and other tales for children.	(She, married, Roald Dahl) → (Patricia Neal, per:spouse, Roald Dahl)
SF13-ENG-026	Oscar-winning actress PattlCia Neal has died Oflungcancer at her home OnMar⅛a's Vineyard, Massachusetts, on Sunday.	(Neal, has died of, LungCancer) → (PattlCia Neal, per:CaUse_of_dea&, lung cancer)
SF13-ENG 027	Al-Hakim,s son, Ammar al-Hakim, has been g,oomed for mon&s to take his father's place.	(Al-Hakim'S Son, ,, Ammar Al-Hakim) → (Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, per:children, Ammar al-Hakim)
SF13-ENG-027	Al-Hakim is the head OfSUPreme Iraqi Islamic Council (SIIC), &e largest Shiite party in Iraq.	(Al-Hakim, of, Supreme Iraqi Islamic Council) → (Abdul AziZ Al-Hakim, per:employee_or_member_of, SUpreme Iraqi Islamic Council)
SF13-ENG-027	His former Shiite partners have gathered again to form theu, own g,oup, the Iraqi National Alliance (INA), which includes the influential Supreme Iraqi Islamic Council (SIIC) of Ammar al- Hakim, who succeeded his father Abdul Aziz al-Hakim, who died in a hospital in Iran last month after a long battle with cancer.	(Al-Hakim, died in a, Iran) → (Abdul AzizAl-Hakim, per:COUntry-of_dea&, Iran)
SF13-ENG-028	'Td ra&er have Sully doing ⅛is than some stranger, or some hotshot t,yingto be &e next Billy Mays,” said &e gjy who actually is the next Billy Mays, his son Billy Mays III.	(The Next Billy Mays, , his son, Billy Mays Iii) → (Billy Mays, per:children, Billy Mays III)
SF13-ENG-029	H映on COnHnUed CyclmgdUringand after a sUnt in &e Army, and drew attention in theearly 1980s when he managed to keep up with Hinault during a race in which amateurs and professionals rode together.	(Fi^on, during and after a stint in, The Army) → (Laurent H映on, per:employee_or_member_of, ⅛e Army)
SF13-ENG-029	Laurent Patrick Fi映onwas born in Paris onAug. 12,1960.	(Laurent Patrick H映on, was born in, Pans) → (Laurent H映on, per:city_of_bir&, Paris)
SF13-ENG-030	Anderson became the Tigers' manager in June 1979 and built on a foundation that included Alan Trammell at shortstop, Lou Whitaker at second base, Kirk Gibson in the outfield and Jack Morris on the pitching staff.	(Anderson, became, The Tigers' Manager) → (Sparky Anderson, per:title, manager)
SF13-ENG-030	In addition to his wife, Carol, Anderson is survived by his sons, Lee and Albert; his dau呼ter, Shirlee Engebrecht; and many grandchildren.	(Anderson, is survived by his sons, Lee) → (Sparky Anderson, per:children, Lee)
SF13-ENG-031	Blake Edwards, a writer and director who was hailed as a Hollywood master of screwball farces and rude comedies like ”Vic- tor/Victoria” and the ”Pink Panther” movies, died Wednesday night in Santa Monica, Calif. He was 88.	(Blake Edwards, ,, writer) → (Blake Edwards, per:title, writer)
SF13-ENG-032	Hwang, who lives in Seoul under ti^t police Secunty, has written books and deUver&d speeches condemning Kim's re⅛me as authoritarian and dictatorial.	(Hwang,, who lives, Seoul) → (Hwang Jang-Yop, per:ciHes_of_residen?e, Seoul)
SF13-ENG-035	Kaczynska, who was 67, married Kaczynski in1978 after meeHnghim in ⅛e northern Polish city of Gdansk, where ⅛ey were bo& academics.	(Kaczynska, married, Kaczynski) → (Maria Kaczynska, per:spouse, Kaczynski)
SF13-ENG-036	Uponhis release he went into exile in India, where he masterminded&e 1973 hijacking of a Royal Nepal Airlines planeknown to becan,yinghundr⅛ds of thousands Ofdollars in cash to fUndhis banned Nepali COngess party.	(His Release, he Wentinto, India) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:COUntries-of-residence, India)
SF13-ENG-036	Koirala began his PObHCaI career as a union organiser and was imprisoned for seven years in 1960 after a failed uprising against the monarchy.	(Koirala, career as, A Union Organiser) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:title, union organiser)
SF13-ENG-036	Koiralawas born in 1925 in Bihar OfIndia where his father Krishna Prasad Koirala and his family were living m exile.	(KOUIala, was born in 1925 in, Bihar) → (Girija Prasad Koirala, per:city_of_bir&, Bihar)
SF13-ENG-036	Koiralawas born in1925 in Blhar OfIndia at the tme when his father Knshna Prasad Koirala along withhis family was exiled by Rana rulers.	(KOUIala, born in 1925, Bihar) → (Ginja Prasad Koirala, per:city_of_birt^, Bihar)
SF13-ENG-037	Chabrol's survivors also include his third wife, Aurore Pajot, who acted as his script supervisor on nearly all of his movies from 1968 on and whom he married in 1981; and Pajot's daughter, Cecile Maistre, who was an assistant director on his films and wrote the script wi⅛ him for "The Girl Cut in Two” (2007).	(Chabrol'S Survivors, wife, Aurore Pajot) → (Claude Chabrol, per:spouse, Aurore Pajot)
SF13-ENG-038	The joint statement said CUnnm呼am was ”an inspiring perfoιmer and dancer into his 80s, and a visionary Choreogapher and dedicated teacher throughout his life, he led quietly and by example,” the statement said. ”	(Cunningham, was, An Inspiring Performer) → (Merce Cunningham, per:title, performer)
SF13-ENG-038	Merce Cunnin呼am, the nonagenarian Choreogapher, is planning for a world Withouthim.	(Merce Cunningham, ,, The Nonagenarian Choreographer) → (Merce Cunningham, per:title, choreographer)
SF13-ENG-039	Acourt on Monday Clearedthe widower OfBriHshreaIityteleVisiOn star Jade Goody, who died of cancer lastyear, ofrape.	(Goody,,, Cancer) → (Jade Goody, per:CaUse_of_dea&, cancer)
SF13-ENG-041	Don Hewitt, &e CBS newsman who invented &e hi驻ly popular TV newsmagazine "60 MmUtes” and produced it for 36 years, died Wednesday.	(Don Hewitt, ,, The Cbs Newsman) → (Don Hewitt, per:title, newsman)
SF13-ENG-041	”He was &e consummate television newsman,“ Don Hewitt, a longime CBS News executive and creator of the long-running”60 Minutes” news program, told Reuters. ”	(Don Hewitt, ,, executive) → (Don Hewitt, per:title, executive)
SF13-ENG-041	Hewitt was already a hi甜y respectedTV newsman.	(Hewitt, was, A Highly Respected Tv Newsman) → (Don Hewitt, per:title, TV newsman)
SF13-ENG-041	Donald Shepard Hewitt was born in New York on Dec. 14,1922, and gew up in&e suburb ofNew Rochelle.	(Donald Shepard Hewitt, born, New York) → (Don Hewitt, per:stateOrprOVinCe_of_bK&, New York)
SF13-ENG 043	Eleanor Louise Greenwich wasborn in Brooklyn on Oct. 23,1940.	(Eleanor Louise Greenwich, born in, Oct.) → (Ellie Greenwich, per:dateof_bir&, 1940-10-23)
SF13-ENG-044	A little more than a year after Dunne died from bladder cancer, the colorful remnants of his estate have been consi映ed by his family to Stair Galleries in Hudson, N.Y., which will auction them Nov. 20.	(Dunne, died, Bladder Cancer) → (Dominick Dunne, per:CaUSe-of_dea&, bladder cancer)
SF13-ENG-048	Charles Gwa⅛mey, anarchit⅞ctknown for HisinfluenHalmodernisthomedesi^s and famouscUents l⅛edirector SteVenSPielberg, has died.	(Charles Gwathmey, ,, architect) → (Charles Gwathmey, per:title, architect)
SF13-ENG-049	Besides his wife, Mandelbrotis survived by two sons, Laurent, of Pans, and Didier, OfNewton, Mass., andth,ee g,andchildren.	(Mandelbrot, two sons, Laurent) → (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:children, Laurent)
SF13-ENG-049	For years, he worked for IBM in New York.	(He, worked, Ibm) → (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:employee_or_member_of, IBM)
SF13-ENG-049	After several years sψ∣ent largely at &e Centre National de la Recherche ScientifiqUe in Paris, Mandelbrot was hired by IBM in 1958 to work at the Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y. Although he worked frequently with academic researchers and served as a visiting professor at Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, it was not until 1987 that he began to teach at Yale, where he earned tenure in 1999.	(Mandelbrot, hired by, Ibm) → (Benoit Mandelbrot,per:employee_or_member_of, IBM)
SF13-ENG-056	"It's anissue for everybodyin&e statebeCaUSe peanuts are a bigpart of our economy," said Don Koehler, executive director of&e Georgia Peanut Commission. ”	(The Georaa Peanut Commission, director of, Don Koehler) → (Georaa Peanut Commission, org:top_members_employees, Don Koehler)
SF13-ENG-060	"We,ll be meeHngwi⅛ scientists, university and sciencepolicy officials to explore practical opportunities for exchange andcollab- oration,” Agre, the AAAS president, was quoted as saying.	(The Aaas President,,, AgIe) → (American Association for the Advancement of Science, org:top_members_employees, Peter C. Agre)
SF13-ENG-060	However, Alan Leshner, chief executive officer of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, noted that Nobels are generally given for work that's a decade old or more, and that the U.S. mustn't become complacent.	(The American Association, ,, Alan Leshner) → (American Association for the Advancement of Science, org:top-members±mployees, Alan Leshner)
SF13-ENG-060	NOrman AUgIsUne, the former Chairman and chief executive of the Lockheed MarUn COrpOraHon; Patricia Goldman, former vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board; Mary Good, a former president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science; Roger Martin, dean of the Rotman School of Management; Brian O'Neill, a former president of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety; and Sheila Widnall, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.	(The American Association, of, Mary Good) → (American Association for the Advancement of Science, org:top-members±mployees, Mary Good)
SF13-ENG-062	”Rrst ofall, ⅛ey never haveenou呼 funding," said Andy Kunz,president of&e U.S. Hi呼SPeed Rail Association, anonprofit that advocates anational hi凯 speed rail network. ”	(The U.S. Hi呼 Speed Rail Association, of, Andy Kunz) → (U.S. H睁 Speed Rail Association, org:top_members_employees, Andy Kunz)
SF13-ENG-064	China's shock at NATO's miUtary CamPai映 in &e former Yugoslavia helped prod Beijing into playmg a bigger role in U.N. peacekeeping, said Bates Gill, director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute and co-author of a recent report on China's peacekeeping activities.	(The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, ,, Bates Gill) → (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, org:toip_members_employees, Bates Gill)
SF13_ENG_064	"Non-state actors, for example, a small g,oup ofpκates off the coast OfSomalia, Al Qaida and Talibanwho OPerate across borders and have more and more sophisticated means of violence, are becoming bigger and bigger challenges to the international system,” said Bates Gill, director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.	(The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, , director of, Bates Gill) → (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, org:top_membersi_employees, Bates Gill)
SF13-ENG-068	”It is not surprising &at one primarily COsmeHC business is trying to th,ow another under the bus by transferring a tax from rich doctors and their wealthy customers to struggling small businesses,” John Overstreet, director of the Indoor Tanning Association, said in a statement Saturday.	(The Indoor TanningAssociation, director of, John Overstreet) → (IndoorTanningAssociation, org:top_membersi_employees, John Overstreet)
SF13-ENG-076	The chairman of the Swiss Bankers Association, Patrick Odier, told weekly NZZ am Sonntag that Italy and France have shown interest in deals like ones Switzerland signed this week with Germany and Britain.	(The Swiss Bankers Association,,, Patrick Odier) → (Swiss Bankers Association, org:top_membersi_employees, Patrick Odier)
SF13-ENG-076	The majority of VOters in Switzerland, which manages more than 25 percent of the world's forei映-held PnVate wealth, support banking secrecy, accordingto a surveypublished last month by&e Swiss Bankers Association inBasel.	(The Swiss Bankers Association, in, Basel) → (Swiss Bankers Association, org:city_of_headquarters, Basel)
SF13-ENG-078	'Arnencans have ari呼tto know&e ttn&- Islamis areli艮on Ofintolerance and violence," said Richard Thompson, legal director ofthe Thomas More Law Center in Ann Arbor. ”	(The Thomas More Law Center, in, AnnArbor) → (ThOmas More Law Center, org:City-of-headquarters, Ann Arbor)
SF13-ENG-082	New solutions maybe enacted for these orphans, &ou孰 said MaryRobinson, CEO of&e National Council for Adoption.	(The National Council, of, Mary Robinson) → (National Counc∏ for Adoption, orgtop_members_employees, MaryRobmson)
SF13-ENG-082	"When you close a country, you end up Causingmore problems than you PreVented,“ said Chuck Johnson, CEO of the National Council for Adoption. ”	(TheNational Council, CEO of, Chuck Johnson) → (National Counc∏ forAdopHon, org:top_membersi_employees, Chuck Johnson)
SF13-ENG-084	"This is definitely a Goldilocks problem," said Jason Grumet, president of &e Bipartisan Policy Center and an energy adviser to the Obama campaign last year.	(The Bipartisan Policy Center,,, Jason Grumet) → (Bipartisan Policy Center, org:toip_members_employees, Jason Grumet)
SF13-ENG-085	"Banks arein strongneed for Mecapital markets (to raise funds),” Li Fuan, adirector at&e China BankingRegjlatory Commission, was quoted as saying at a forum over the weekend.	(The China Banking Regulatory Commission, a director, Li Fuan) → (China Banking Regulatory Commission, org:toip_members_employees, Li Fuan)
SF13-ENG-089	RIA NovosU and InterfaX CiteAnatOly Isa⅛in, head OfRosoboronexport, as saymg Thursday "no⅛rngisblockingthe continuation of military-technical cooperation” with Iran.	(Rosoboronexport,, head of, Anatoly Isa⅛in) → (Rosoboronexport, org:top_membersi_employees, Anatoly Isaikin)
SF13-ENG-089	Rosoboronexport is the Onlycompany in Russia thatis allowed to export arms, dual-use products and military-related services.	(Rosoboronexport, is &e Onlycompanyin, Russia) → (Rosoboronexport, org:COUntry-of-headquarters, Russia)
SF13-ENG-091	Wi& his wife, Cornelie, MiddelhOffinVested money m 2000 and 2001 with Esch in funds thatwere formed to buy five properties from KarstadtQuelle, as Arcandor was then known, and leased back to the department store chain before Middelhoff joined the company, according to Middelhoff's spokesman.	(Arcandor,,, Karstadttquelle) → (Arcandor, org:alUrnaU_names, KarstadtQuelle)
SF13-ENG-091	Arcandor's mail-order subsidiary Quelleis in worse shape however, Klaus-Hubert Goergtold apress conferencein ⅛e WesUm city of Essen, where Arcandor is based.	(Arcandor,,, Essen) → (Arcandor, org:City-of-headquarters, Essen)
Figure 5:	Mapped facts: MAMA-GPT-2XL on TAC KBP.
17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Candidate facts to mapped facts Sentence BERTLARGE	GPT-2xl	
SF13-ENG-005	The men ,who live inthe Chicago area, Wereidentified as David Coleman Headley (Rana,, a native of, Canada) → (Tahawwur Hussain Rana, per:ongin, Canada)	- , 49 , a US citizen , and Tahawwur Hussain Rana , 48 , Rana , a native of Pakistan and citizen of Canada .
SF13-ENG-006	Khan died at his music centre near San FranciscO in the United States after a pro- (Khan, died at his, The United States) → (Ali Akbar Khan, PeKcOuntry-ofdeath,	- longed kidney ailment , the news agency said .	United States)
SF13-ENG-006	Byhis early 20s hewas music director ofAll-India Radio in Lucknow, br,oadcasUng	-	(He, of, All-India Radio) → (Ali Akbar Khan, per:employee_or.member_of, All- as a solo artist and composing for the radio’s orchestra.	India Radio)
SF13-ENG-006	Defying his fa&er , Khan moved to Bombay and began WriHng scores for films , (Khan, moved, Bombay) → (Ali Akbar Khan, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, Bombay)	- including Chetan Anand ’ s ” Aandhiyan ” ( 1952) , Satyajit Ray ’ s ” Devi ” ( 1960 )and Tapan Sinha ' s ” Hungry Stones ”(1960).
SF13-ENG-007	In 1966 he gιaduated from &e faculty of &eology at Al-Azhar, &e 10⅛ century -	(He,	g,aduated from, Al-Azhar) → (Mohammed Sayed Tantawi, university &at has Irained &e majority of Sunni Muslim clerics from Africa and	per:schools_attended, Al-Azhar) Asia.
SF13-ENG-009	He became AIBA president in 2006 by defeating longUme incumbent Anwar -	(Longime IncumbentAnwar Chowdhry, by, Aiba President) → (Anwar Chowdhry, Chowdhry of Pakistan, who was later baπ,ed for alleged financial coπ,upUon.	per:employee_or_member_of, AIBA)
SF13-ENG-011	Marshall couldget a IenghypnSon term ifconvicted ofg,and larceny.	-	(Marshall, of, Grand Larceny) → (An&ony Marshall, per:charges, larceny)
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn, also known asAzzam al- Amriki ,was dressedinwhiterobes andwearing (Gadahn, known as, Azzam Al-Amriki) → (Adam Gadahn, per:aIternate_names,	- a white turban as he called for attacks on what he described as ” high - value targets Azzam al-Amriki) .”
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn g,ew up on a farm in California and converted to Islam before moving to (Gadahn, to, Pakistan) → (Adam Gadahn, per:counlries_of_residence, Pakistan)	- Pakistan in 1998 and reportedly attending an al - Qaida training camp .
SF13-ENG-012	Hewas bom in Oregon onSept. 1,1978 to a Jewish family.	-	(He,born in,Sept.) → (Adam Gadahn, per:date_of_birth, 1978-09-01)
SF13-ENG-015	Besides her sister , Philip , survivors include a son , Graham ; ⅛ree daughters , (Her Sister, son,, Graham) → (Lucille Clifton, per:children, Graham)	- Sidney , Gillian and Alexia ; and three grandchildren .
SF13-ENG-015	In addition to her dau呼ter , of Columbia , o&er survivors include two dau呼ters	(Her DaU呼ter, ,, Sidney Clifton) → (Lucille Clifton, per:children, Sidney Clifton) - , Sidney Clifton of Los Angeles and Gillian Clifton - Monell of Fort Washington , Md . , ; a son , Graham Clifton of Wichita ; a sister ; and three grandchildren .
SF13-ENG-017	Haig, 85 , diedearly Saturday in a Baltimore , Maryland , hospital.	(Haig, died early, A Baltimore, Maryland, Hospital) → (Alexander Haig, - per:stateorprovince_of_deat^, Maryland)
SF13_ENG_019	MCGregor wasborn in Iowa , but g,ew up in Colorado where his father ,Brian, was	(Mcg,egor, but g,ew up, Brian) → (Keli MCGregor, per:parents, Brian)	- a coaching legend at Arvada West .
SF13-ENG-025	Kissel was born in Adrian, Michigan, but her family had also lived in Minneapolis. -	(Kissel, in, Minneapolis) → (Nancy Kissel, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, Minneapolis)
SF13-ENG-025	Kissel, 46, of Adrian, Michigan, was convicted of drug^ng ⅛en bashing her hus- -	(Kissel, of, Michigan) → (NanCy Kissel, per:statesorProVinCeS-Of-residence, band Robert to death in a luxury Hong Kong apartment and sentenced to life in	Michigan) prison in September 2005.
SF13-ENG-026	Neal had lungcancer and died ather home in Edgartown, Massachusetts on Mar&a	(Neal, died ather home in, Edgartown) → (PatriCia Neal, per:city_of_dea&, Edgar- - ’ s Vineyard , said longtime friend Bud Albers of Knoxville .	town)
SF13-ENG-026	She g,ew up in Knoxville, Tenn., where Neal was turned onto acting at 10 after -	(She, in, Tenn.) → (PatriCia Neal, per:statesoiprovinces_of_residence, Tennessee) seeing an impassioned speech about ”demon rum” at the local temperance union speaking contest.
SF13-ENG-027	Al-Hakim, who died Wednesday of lung cancer in Tehran, was a symbol for many -	(Al-Hakim, who died, Tehran) → (Abdul AZiZ Al-Hakim, per:city_of_dea&, of the re-emergence of Iraq’s Shiite political majority after decades of oppression	Tehran) under Saddam Hussein’s Sunni-led regime.
SF13-ENG-028	TAMEA Heart disease , exacerbated by cocaine use , killed celebrated TV pitch-	(Celebrated Tv Pitchman Billy Mays, killed, Tampa) → (Billy Mays, - man Billy Mays, according to the Hillsborough County medicalexaminer ' S final	per:CaUSe-of_dea&, TAMPA Heart disease) autopsy report released Friday .
SF13-ENG-030	Family spokesman Dan Ewald SaidAnderson died IromcomplicaUons from demen-	(Anderson, died from, DemenHa) → (Sparky Anderson, per:CaUSe-of_dea&, de- - tia .	mentia)
SF13-ENG-031	He served m&e Coast Guard duringWorld War II andhad a rare leading rolein the	(He, in, The Coast Guard) → (Blake Edwards, per:employee_or_member_of, Coast - low - budget ⅛riller ” Strangle, of ⅛e Swamp ”(1946).	Guard)
SF13-ENG-031	His agent Lou Pitt Confirmedhehad died, while the ” Mtertainment Tonight "news	(He, died, Complications) → (Blake Edwards, per:CaUSe-of_dea&, ComPliCaHonS)	- show and website reported that he died in Santa Monica on Wednesday night from complications of pneumonia , with Andrews at his side .
SF13-ENG-033	In a career ⅛at spanned seven decades, Ginzburg authored several g,oundtreaking	-	(Ginzburg, in, The Lebedev Physics Institute) → (Vitaly Ginzburg, studies in various fields - such as quantum theory, astrophysics, radio-astronomy	per:employee_or_member_of, Lebedev Physics Institute) and diffusion of cosmic radiation in the Earth's atmosphere - that were of "Nobel Prize caliber,” said Gennady Mesyats, the director of the Lebedev Physics Institute in Moscow, where Ginzburg worked.
SF13-ENG-035	Kaczynska , who died aged 59 , married Kaczynski in 1978 .	(Kaczynska, married, KaCzynSki) → (Maria Kaczynska, per:spouse, Kaczynski)	-
SF13-ENG-037	Prime Minister Francois Fillon called Chabrol a ” g,eat director , producer and	(Afp Chabrol, was, director) → (Claude Chabrol, per:title, filmdirector); (Chabrol, - screenwriter ( who ) was one of the grand figures of the ’ Nouvelle vague , ’ which	director, Producer) → (Claude Chabrol, per:title, producer) revolutionized the style and techniques of cinema by looking at real experience , true life , that which is indiscreet and subtle . ”
SF13-ENG-038	Cunningham,s survivors include a brother, Jack CUnnin呼am of Centralia.	-	(CUnnin呼am'S Survivors, brother, Jack CUnnin呼am) → (Merce Cunningham, per:siblings, Jack Cunningham)
SF13-ENG-038	Mercier Philip Cunnin^am was bom in Centralia, Wash., on April 16,1919.	-	(Mercier Philip Cunnin呼am, was bom in, April) → (Merce Cunningham, per:date-oLbir*,1919-04-16)
SF13-ENG-041	A year after enrolling in New York University on a track scholarship , Hewitt (Hewitt,,, New York University) → (Don Hewitt, per:schools_attended, New York	- dropped out .	University)
SF13-ENG-041	By&e Hme Hewittwas 6, his family was living in New R∞helle, N.Y.	-	(Hewitt, in, New Rochelle) → (Don Hewitt, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, New R∞helle)
SF13-ENG-043	Greenwich alsoworked as an arranger and singer, a role that saw her workingwi⅛	(Greenwich, worked as an, Singer) → (Ellie Greenwich, per:title, singer)	- artists including Frank Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald .
SF13-ENG-044	Dunne was born in 1925 in Hartford, Connecticut, to a wealthy Roman Catholic	-	(Dunne, was born in 1925 in, Connecticut) → (Dominick Dunne, family and grew up in some of the same sæial circles as the Kennedys.	per:stateoBroVinCe-of_bir&, Connecticut)
SF13-ENG-044	In 1957 , Dunne moved to Los Angeles to work on &eCBS showcase ” Playhouse	(Dunne, movedto, Los Angeles) → (Dominick Dunne, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, Los - 90 . "	Angeles)
SF13-ENG-044	Dunne found his greatest prominence as a celebrity journalist while covering the	-	(Dunne, as, A Celebrity Journalist) → (Dominick Dunne, peκHtle, Celebrityjour- 1995 murder trial of football star and actor O.J. Simpson, who had been accused of	nalist) killing his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald Goldman.
SF13-ENG-045	Goldstein died in New York on Aug. 28 .	(Goldstein, died, Aug.) → (Adam Goldstein, per:date_of_death, XXXX-08-28)	-
SF13-ENG-046	After actinginmovies andtelevision , Meredith receded into a quiet lifein Santa Fe	(Meredith, in, Santa Fe) → (DonMeredith, per:ciUes_of_residence, Santa Fe)	- , writing , painting , golfing and acting in a stage production of ” The Odd Couple . ”
SF13-ENG-046	In hi呼 school and at Southern Methodist University , where , already known as	(Dandy Don, where ,, Southern Methodist University) → (Don Meredith,	- Dandy Don ( a nickname bestowed on him by his brother) , Meredith became an	per:Schools_attended, Southern Methodist University) all - American .
SF13-ENG-046	He Spentmuch ofhis life backingaway from ⅛e nickname Dandy Don, particularly	(He, the nickname, Dandy Don) → (Don Meredith, per:alternate_names, Dandy - during his secluded later decades in New Mexico .	Don)
SF13-ENG-048	The g,oup, known variously as the Five or the Whites (for the color of most of	-	(Gwa&mey, of, The New York School) → (Charles Gwa⅛mey, their buildings) or the New York School, consisted of Gwa⅛mey, Michael Graves,	per:employee_or_member_of, New York School) Eisenman, John Hejduk and Richard Meier.
SF13-ENG-048	Meier , who said he had known Gwa⅛mey for 50 years , has particularly fond	(Gwa⅛mey, his second wife ,, Bette-Ann Damson) → (Charles Gwa⅛mey,	- memories from the time when Gwathmey was first courting his second wife , Bette per:spouse, Bette-Ann Damson) - Ann Damson , and they all picked corn for dinner in a field adjacent to a barn Meier was renting on the East End of Long Island .
SF13-ENG-057	By2013, automakers will have dozens of plug-in el&cttic hybrid vehicles and fully -	(A123 Systems Inc., a vice president, Jason Forcier) → (A123 Systems Inc., electric vehicles, said Jason Forcier, avicepresident at battery maker A123 Systems	org:top_members_employees, Jason Forcier) Inc.
SF13-ENG-058	Access Industries , a privately held company founded in 1986 by Len BIaVatoik , (Access Industries, founded in 1986 by, Len BIaVatoik) → (Access Industries,	- has a diverse portfolio of investments in industry , real estate , media and telecom-	org:founded_by, LenBIaVamik) munications .
SF13-ENG-069	&quot;The indications are PoSiHVe,&quot; said Vincent Cogliano, director of the	-	(Iarc,, director of&e, Vincent Cogliano) → (International Agency for Research on Monographs ProgIam at IARC, which decides oncarcinogen classifications.	Cancer, org:top_members_employees, Vincent Cogliano)
SF13-ENG-082	"Therehasn't been aconcerted pushto open doors for Muslim orphans because ⅛e	-	(Adoption,	in, Alexandria) →	(NaHonaI Council for	Adoption, expectation would be that those efforts would fall flat," said Chuck Johnson, chief	org:city_of_headquarters, Alexandria) executive of the National Council for Adoption, a policy group in Alexandria, Va.
SF13-ENG-084	" The scenario itself is secret, " said Eileen McMenamin , vice president of com-	(The Bipartisan Policy Center, , vice president of, Eileen Mcmenamin) → (Bipar- - munications for &e Bipartisan Policy Center ( BPC ) , which is hosting the event	HSan Policy Center, org:top_members_employees, Hleen McMenamin) dubbed ” Cyber ShockWave .”
SF13-ENG-088	Bank Julius Baer Co., based in Basel, Switzerland, Suedbecause WikiLeaks posted -	(Bank Julius Baer Co., based, Basel) → (Bank Julius Baer, accoun&older information from its Cayman outpost amid allegations of money	org:city_of_headquarters, Basel) laundering and tax evasion.
SF13-ENG-094	The o⅛er manufacturers aretwo US companies, L-3 Communications and Rapiscan -	(Rapiscan, ,, TWo Us Companies) → (Rapiscan Systems, Systems, a unit of OSI Systems, and British rivalSmi&s Detection.	org:CoUntJy-of-headquarters, US)
SF13-ENG-096	Freedom was founded in ⅛e 1930s by R.C. Hoiles and is still majority owned by -	(Freedom, was founded in the, R.C. Hoiles) → (Freedom Communications, &e Hoiles family.	org:founded_by, R.C. Hoiles)
SF13-ENG-098	Shares of Millipore have more than doubled since MarHn D . Madaus took over as (Millipore, have, MarHn D.) → (Millipore Corp., org:top_members_employees,	- chief executive in January 2005 .	Martin D. Madaus)
Figure 6:	Mapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE vs. MAMA-GPT-2XL on TAC KBP.
18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to UnmaPPed facts
SF13_ENG_001	Bashardost was born in 1965 in the southern Ghanzi province and his family migrated to Iran and then to Pakistan after successive coup and factional fighting in Afghanistan .	(Bashardost, in, The Southern Ghanzi Province) —→ (Ramazan Bashardost, per:stateorprovince_of_birth, The Southern Ghanzi Province)
SF13_ENG_012	Gadahn , also known as Azzam the American , was born in 1978 .	(Gadahn,,, AZZam) —→ (Adam Gadahn, per:aIternate-names, AZZam)
SF13_ENG_015	Besides her sister , Philip , survivors include a son , Graham ; three daughters , Sidney , Gillian and Alexia ; and three grandchildren.	(Her Sister, ,, Philip) → (Lucille Clifton, per:siblings, Philip)
SF13_ENG_015	The poet laureate of Maryland from 1979 to 1985 , Clifton was a writer in residence at Coppin State College , now Coppin State University , a historically black college in Baltimore .	(Clifton, in, Coppin State College) → (Lucille Clifton, per:school_attended, Coppin State College)
SF13_ENG_015	Her father ,Samuel, was a steelworker ; her mother , Thelma , worked in a laundry .	(Her Father, ,, Samuel) → (Lucille Clifton, per:parents, Samuel)
SF13_ENG_015	Lucille Clifton , a distinguished American poet whose work trained lenses wide and narrow on the experience of being black and female in the 20th century , exploring vast subjects like the indignities of history and intimate ones like the indignities of the body , died on Saturday in Baltimore .	(Lucille Clifton, ,, poet) → (Lucille Clifton, per:title, poet)
SF13_ENG_015	The precise cause of death had not been determined , her sister , Elaine Philip , told The Associated Press on Sunday .	(Her Sister, ,, Elaine Philip) → (Lucille Clifton, per:siblings, Elaine Philip)
SF13_ENG_037	CLAUDE CHABROL , PIONEER FRENCH FILMMAKER , DIES AT 80 Joseph Berger contributed reporting from New York , and Maia de la Baume contributed from Paris .	(Claude Chabrol, ,, Pioneer French Filmmaker) → (Claude Chabrol, per:title, Pioneer French Filmmaker)
SF13_ENG_037	Chabrol ' S survivors also include his third wife , Aurore Pajot, who acted as his script supervisor on nearly all of his movies from 1968 on and whom he married in 1981 ; and Pajot ' s daughter , Cecile Maistre , who was an assistant director on his films and wrote the script with him for ” The Girl Cut in Two ” (2 0 07 ).	(His Third Wife, ,, Aurore Pajot) → (Claude Chabrol, per:spouse, Aurore Pajot)
SF13_ENG_044	Dominick Dunne , a novelist and journalist who chronicled true - crime tales of the rich and infamous , including O . J . Simpson and Claus von Bulow , and in turn became a celebrity in his own right , died of bladder cancer Aug . 26 at his home in New York City .	(Dominick Dunne, ,, A Novelist) → (Dominick Dunne, per:title, A Novelist)
SF13_ENG_044	Dunne and his wife , Ellen Griffin Dunne , known as Lenny , were married in 1954 .	(His Wife, ,, Ellen Griffin Dunne) → (Dominick Dunne, per:spouse, Ellen Griffin Dunne)
SF13_ENG_044	Dunne was born in 1925 in Hartford , Connecticut , to a wealthy Roman Catholic family and grew up in some of the same social circles as the Kennedys .	(Dunne, ,, Connecticut) —→ (Dominick Dunne, per:stateorprovince_of_birth, Connecticut)
SF13_ENG_049	Aprofessor emeritus at Yale University , Mandelbrot was born in Poland but as a child moved with his family to France where he was educated .	(Mandelbrot, ,, Yale University) —→ (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:employee_or_member_of, Yale University)
SF13_ENG_058	Access Industries , a privately held company founded in 1986 by Len Blavatnik , has a diverse portfolio of investments in industry , real estate , media and telecommunications .	(Access Industries, ,, A Privately Held Company) → (Access Industries, properties, A Privately Held Company)
SF13_ENG_079	Water and its links to development , peace and conflict were key words in the annual sessions , Anders Berntell , executive director of Stockholm International Water Institute ( SIWI ) , said in his opening address .	(Stockholm International, ,, Anders Berntell)	→ (Stockholm International Water Institute, per:top_members_or_employees, AnderS Berntell)
Figure 7:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE on TAC KBP.
ID	Sentence	CandidatefactstoUnmaPPedfacts
SF13_ENG_009	He took office in 2006 by defeating longtime incumbent Anwar Chowdhry from Pakistan, who was later barred for	(Longtime Incumbent Anwar Chowdhry, from, Pakistan) —→ (Anwar Chowdhry, per:countries_of_residence,	Pakistan)
alleged financial corruption.
SF13-ENG-012	The message also featured several appearances of Adam Gadahn, also known as Azzam al-Amriki, an American who	(Adam Gadahn, also, AZzam Al-Amriki) —→ (Adam Gadahn, per:alternate_names, Azzam Al-Amriki); (Adam Gadahn,
grew up in Riverside County and converted to Islam and joined al-Qaida.	,, Azzam Al-Amriki) → (Adam Gadahn, ,, Azzam Al-Amriki)
SF13_ENG_014	Mohammed Oudeh, a former math teacher who became the mastermind of the deadly attack on Israeli athletes at the	(Mohammed Oudeh, ,, teacher) —→ (Mohammed Oudeh, per:title, teacher)
1972 Munich Olympics, died Friday in Damascus.
SF13_ENG_014	He settled in the West Bank town of Ramallah, but in 1999, after a trip to Jordan, he was barred by Israel from returning.	(He, in, The West Bank Town) —→ (Mohammed Oudeh, per:cities_of_residence, The West Bank Town)
SF13_ENG_014	Mohammed Oudeh, a former math teacher who became the mastermind of the deadly attack on Israeli athletes at the	(Mohammed Oudeh, ,, A Former Math Teacher) —→ (Mohammed Oudeh, per:title, A Former Math Teacher)
1972 Munich Olympics, died Friday in Damascus.
SF13_ENG_014	In later years, as a graying member of the Palestinian old guard, Oudeh, most commonly known by his guerrilla name,	(Oudeh, ,, Abu Daoud) —→ (Mohammed Oudeh, per:aIternate-names, Abu Daoud)
Abu Daoud, showed no remorse for the botched hostage taking and killings of 11 members of the Israeli Olympic team
that shook the world.
SF13_ENG_015	Afterherhusband died in 1984, Cliftontaught atthe University of California atSanta Cruzbefore returningto Maryland (Clifton, of, Santa Cruz) → (Lucille Clifton, per:cities_of_residence, Santa Cruz)
in 1989.________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SF13_ENG_015	Lucille Clifton, a National Book Award-WinningpOet and Pulitzer finalist, has died.	(Lucille Clifton, ,, poet) —→ (Lucille Clifton, per:title, poet)
SF13_ENG_015	When she was agirl, Lucille Clifton sat on her mother's lap and listened to her recite poetry.	(Lucille Clifton, ,, A Girl) —→ (Lucille Clifton, gender, A Girl)
SF13_ENG_015	In 1967, they moved to Baltimore, and Clifton worked in Washington for the old U.S. Office of Education.	(They, to, Baltimore) —→ (Lucille Clifton, per:CitieS-ofresidence, Baltimore)
SF13_ENG_015	Clifton's sister, Elaine Philip, said the former poet laureate of Maryland passed away Saturday morning at Johns	Hop-	(Clifton'S Sister,,, Elaine Philip) —→ (Lucille Clifton, per:siblings,	Elaine Philip)
kins University Hospital in Baltimore.
SF13_ENG_018	Harvey Pekar, the writer of comics whose autobiographical comic book series “American Splendor” chronicled his	life	(Harvey Pekar, ,, writer) —→ (Harvey Pekar, per:title, writer)
as a filing clerk, record collector, freelance jazz critic and one of life's all-around misfits, was found dead July 12 at his
home near Cleveland.
SF13_ENG_018	Pekar attended whatbecame Case Western Reserve University, served in the Navy in the late 1950s and worked a series (Pekar, what became, Case Western Reserve University) —→ (Harvey Pekar, per:schools_attended, Case Western Reserve
of menial jobs before taking a 30-year jobas a filing clerk at a VA hospital in Cleveland.	University)
SF13_ENG_025	Kissel, 46,of Adrian, Michigan, was convicted of drugging then bashing her husband Robert to death in a luxury Hong (Kissel, ,, Adrian) —→ (Nancy Kissel, per:CitieS-of_residence, Adrian); (Kissel, ,, Michigan) —→ (Nancy Kissel,
Kong apartment and sentenced to life in prison in September 2005.	per:statesorprovinces_of_residence, Michigan)
SF13_ENG_038	Mercier Philip Cunningham was born in Centralia, Wash., on April 16, 1919.	(Mercier Philip Cunningham, was born in, Centralia) —→ (Merce Cunnin^am, was born in, Centralia); (Mercier Philip
Cunnin^am, in, Wash.) —→ (Merce Cunningham, per:stateorprovince_of_birth, Wash.); (Mercier Philip Cunningham,
in, April) → (Merce Cunningham, per:date_of_birth, 1919-04-16)
SF13_ENG_038	Cunnin^am's survivors include abrother, Jack Cunningham of Centralia.	(Cunnin^am'S Survivors, ,, Jack Cunningham) —→ (Merce Cunningham, per:siblings, Jack	Cunningham)
SF13_ENG_041	By the time Hewitt was 6, his family was living in New Rochelle, N.Y.	(Hewitt, in, New Rochelle) —→ (Don Hewitt, per:cities_of_residence, New Rochelle)
SF13_ENG_041	He is survived by his third wife, former television news correspondent Marilyn Berger; his sons, Steven and Jeffrey; his	(Hewitt, ,, Jilian Childers Hewitt) —→ (Don Hewitt, per:children, Jilian Childers Hewitt)
daughter, Lisa Cassara; his stepdaughter, Jilian Childers Hewitt, whom Hewitt adopted; and three grandchildren.
SF13_ENG_044	Dunne was born in 1925 in Hartford, Connecticut, to a wealthy Roman Catholic family and grew up in some of the	(Dunne, was born in 1925 in, Connecticut) —→ (Dominick Dunne, per:stateorprovince_of_birth,	Connecticut)
same social circles as the Kennedys.
SF13_ENG_044	Dunne was part of a famous family that also included his brother, novelist and screenwriter John Gregory Dunne; his	(His Brother, ,, Novelist) —→ (His brother, per:title, Novelist)
brother's wife, author Joan Didion; and his son, Griffin.
SF13_ENG_044	Dunne andhis wife, Ellen Griffin Dunne, known as Lenny, weremarried in 1954.	(Dunne, and, Ellen Griffin Dunne) → (Dominick Dunne,per:spouse, Ellen Griffin Dunne)
SF13_ENG_047	The women were accompanied by Reyna Luisa Tamayo, the mother of political prisoner Orlando Zapata, who died at	(Political Prisoner Orlando ZaPata, ,, Reyna Luisa TamayO) —→ (Orlando Zapata, per:children, Reyna Luisa Tamayo)
age 42 in a hunger strike February 23 to protest prison conditions.
SF13_ENG_061	InterContinental Hotels Group, owners of Holiday Inn Worldwide, has been ordered by a court to pay $25 million in	(Intercontinental Hotels Group, ,, Holiday Inn Worldwide) —→ (InterContinental Hotels Group, org:parents, Holiday
damages to a franchisee for fraud.	Inn Worldwide)
SF13_ENG_079	Water and its links to development, peace and conflictwere key words in the annual sessions, Anders Berntell, executive	(Stockholm International, director, AnderS Berntell) —→ (Stockholm International Water Institute,
director of Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI), said in his opening address.	per:top_members_or_employees, Anders Berntell); (Stockholm International, , executive director, AnderS Bern-
tell) —→ (Stockholm International Water Institute, per:top_members_or_employees, AnderS Berntell)
SF13_ENG_090	ECO member countries include Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyr到zstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey,	(Eco Member Countries,,, Azerbaijan) —→ (Economic Cooperation Organization, org:members, Azerbaijan)
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
SF13_ENG_096	Aphone message left Sunday at Freedom's Irvine, California, headquarters was not immediately returned.	(Freedom'S Irvine, ,, California)—→ (Freedom Communications, org:stateorprovince_of_headquarters, California)
SF13_ENG_097	STX Finland is part of the international STX Europe Group, with shipyards in Brazil, Norway, France, Romania and	(SE Finland, of, The International SE Europe Group)—→ (STX Finland, org:subsidaries, The International SE Europe
Vietnam.	Group)
Figure 8:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-GPT-2XL on TAC KBP.
19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts	
		BERTLARGE		GPT-2XL
SF13-ENG-001	Bashardost was born in 1965 in the southern Ghanzi province and his family mi- grated to Iran and then to Pakistan after successive coup and factional fighting in Afghanistan.	(Bashardost, in, The SOUthern Ghanzi Province) → (Ramazan Bashardost, per:stateorprOvmce-of_bir&, The Southern Ghanzi Province)	
SF13-ENG-009	He took office in 2006 by defeating longtime incumbent Anwar Chowdhry from Pakistan, who was later barred for alleged financial corruption.	(Longtime Incumbent Anwar Chowdhry, from, Pakistan) → (Anwar Chowdhry, per:origin, Pakistan)	(Longtime Incumbent Anwar Chowdhry, from, Pakistan) → (Anwar Chowdhry, per:CoUntries-of-residence, Pakistan)
SF13-ENG-012	Gadahn , also known as Azzam the American , was born in 1978 .	(Gadahn,,, Azzam) → (Adam Gadahn, per:alternate_names, Azzam)	(Gadahn, also known as, Azzam) → (Adam Gadahn, per:alternate_names, Azzam)
SF13-ENG-012	The message also featured several appearances of Adam Gadahn, also known as Azzam al-Amriki, an American who grew up in Riverside County and converted to Islam and joined al-Qaida.	(Adam Gadahn, also known as, Azzam Al-Amriki) → (Adam Gadahn, per:alternate_names, Azzam Al-Amriki)	(Adam Gadahn, also, Azzam Al-Amriki) → (Adam Gadahn, per:altemate_names, Azzam Al-Amriki); (Adam Gadahn, ,, Azzam Al-Amriki) → (Adam Gadahn, per:alternate_names, Azzam Al-Amriki)
SF13-ENG-014	Mohammed Oudeh, a former math teacher who became the mastermind of the deadly attack on Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics, died Friday in Dam- ascus.	(Mohammed Oudeh,,, teacher) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:litle, teacher)	
SF13-ENG-014	He settled in the West Bank town of Ramallah, but in 1999, after a trip to Jordan, he was barred by Israel from returning.	(He, in, TheWestBankTown) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:CiHeS-ofresidence,The West Bank Town)	(He, settled in, The West Bank Town) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, The West Bank Town)
SF13-ENG-014	Mohammed Oudeh, a former math teacher who became the mastermind of the deadly attack on Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics, died Friday in Dam- ascus.	(Mohammed Oudeh, ,, A Former Ma& Teacher) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:htle, A Former Math Teacher)	(Mohammed Oudeh, ,, teacher) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:title, teacher)
SF13_ENG_014	In later years, as a graying member of the Palestinian old guard, Oudeh, most com- monly known by his guerrilla name, Abu Daoud, showed no remorse for the botched hostage taking and killings of 11 members of the Israeli Olympic team that shook the world.	(Oudeh, ,, Abu Daoud) → (Mohammed Oudeh, per:altemate_names, Abu Daoud)	-
SF13-ENG-015	The precise cause of death had not been determined , her sister , Elaine Philip , told The Associated Press on Sunday .		(Her Sister, ,, Elaine Philip) → (Lucille Clifton, per:siblings, Elaine Philip)
SF13-ENG-015	After her husband died in 1984, Clifton taught at the University of California at Santa Cruz before returning to Maryland in 1989.	(Clifton, of, Santa Cruz) → (Lucille Clifton, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, Santa CrUZ)	(Clifton, taught at, the University) → (Lucille Clifton, per:employee_or_member_of, &e University of California)
SF13-ENG-015	Lucille Clifton, a National Book Award-winning poet and Pulitzer finalist, has died.		(Lucille Clifton, ,, poet) → (Lucille Clifton, per:title, poet)
SF13-ENG-015	When she was a girl, Lucille Clifton sat on her mother’s lap and listened to her recite poetry.		(Lucille Clifton, ,, A Girl) → (Lucille Clifton, gender, A Girl)
SF13-ENG-015	In 1967, they moved to Baltimore, and Clifton worked in Washington for the old U.S. Office of Education.	(Clifton, worked in, old U.S. Office) → (Lucille Clifton, per:employee_or.member_of, U.S. Office of EdUCaHon)	(They, to, Baltimore) → (Lucille Clifton, per:ciHes_of_residence, Baltimore)
SF13-ENG-015	Clifton’s sister, Elaine Philip, said the former poet laureate of Maryland passed away Saturday morning at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore.		(Clifton’S Sister, ,, Elaine Philip) → (Lucille Clifton, per:siblings, Elaine Philip)
SF13-ENG-018	Harvey Pekar, the writer of comics whose autobiographical comic book series ”American Splendor” chronicled his life as a filing clerk, record collector, free- lance jazz critic and one of life’s all-around misfits, was found dead July 12 at his home near Cleveland.	-	(Harvey Pekar, ,, writer) → (Harvey Pekar, per:title, writer)
SF13-ENG-018	Pekar attended what became Case Western Reserve University, served in the Navy in the late 1950s and worked a series of menial jobs before taking a 30-year jobas a filing clerk at a VA hospital in Cleveland.		(Pekar, what became, Case Western Reserve University) → (Harvey Pekar, per:sChoolS-attended, Case Western Reserve University)
SF13-ENG-025	Kissel, 46, of Adrian, Michigan, was convicted of drugging then bashing her hus- band Robert to death in a luxury Hong Kong apartment and sentenced to life in prison in September 2005.		(Kissel, ,, Adrian) → (Nancy Kissel, per:CiHeS-of_residence, Adrian); (Kissel,,, Michigan) → (Nancy Kissel, per:statesorprovinces_of_residence, Michigan)
SF13-ENG-037	CLAUDE CHABROL , PIONEER FRENCH FILMMAKER , DIES AT 80 Joseph Berger contributed reporting from New York , and Maia de la Baume contributed from Paris .	(Claude Chabrol,,, Pioneer French Filmmaker) → (Claude Chabrol, per:htle, Pio- neer French Filmmaker)	
SF13-ENG-037	Chabrol ’ s survivors also include his third wife , Aurore Pajot , who acted as his script supervisor on nearly all of his movies from 1968 on and whom he married in 1981 ; and Pajot ’ s daughter , Cecile Maistre , who was an assistant director on his films and wrote the script with him for ” The Girl Cut in Two ” ( 2007 ) .	(HiS Third Wife,,, Aurore Pajot) → (Claude Chabrol, per:spouse, Aurore Pajot)	(Chabrol’s survivors, third wife, Aurore Pajot) → (Claude Chabrol, per:spouse, Aurore Pajot)
SF13-ENG-038	Mercier Philip Cunningham was born in Centralia, Wash., on April 16, 1919.		(Mercier Philip Cunningham, was born in, Centralia) → (Merce Cunningham, was born in, Centralia); (Mercier Philip Cunningham, in, Wash.) → (Merce Cunning- ham, per:stateorProVince_of_bir&, Wash.); (Mercier Philip Cunnin呼am, in, April) → (Merce Cunningham, per:date_of_birth, 1919-04-16))
SF13-ENG-038	Cunningham’s survivors include a brother, Jack Cunningham of Centralia.	-	(Cunningham’S Survivors, ,, Jack Cunningham) → (Merce Cunningham, per:siblings, Jack Cunningham)
SF13-ENG-041	By the time Hewitt was 6, his family was living in New Rochelle, N.Y.		(Hewitt, in, New Rochelle) → (Don Hewitt, per:CiHeS-ofresidence, New R∞helle)
SF13-ENG-041	He is survived by his third wife, former television news correspondent Marilyn Berger; his sons, Steven and Jeffrey; his daughter, Lisa Cassara; his stepdaughter, Jilian Childers Hewitt, whom Hewitt adopted; and three grandchildren.		(Hewitt, ,, Jilian Childers Hewitt) → (Don Hewitt, per:children, Jilian Childers Hewitt)
SF13-ENG-044	Dominick Dunne , a novelist and journalist who chronicled true - crime tales of the rich and infamous , including O . J . Simpson and Claus von Bulow , and in turn became a celebrity in his own right , died of bladder cancer Aug . 26 at his home in New York City .	(Dominick Dunne,,, A Novelist) → (Dominick Dunne, per:htle, A Novelist)	(Dunne, ,, novelist) → (Dominick Dunne, per:title, novelist)
SF13-ENG-044	Dunne and his wife , Ellen Griffin Dunne , known as Lenny , were married in 1954 .	(His Wife, ,, Ellen Gnffin DUnne) → (Dominick Dunne, per:spouse, Ellen Griffin Dunne)	(Dunne, and, Ellen Griffin Dunne) → (Dominick Dunne, per:spouse, Ellen Griffin Dunne)
SF13-ENG-044	Dunne was born in 1925 in Hartford, Connecticut, to a wealthy Roman Catholic family and grew up in some of the same social circles as the Kennedys.	(Dunne, was born in 1925 in, Connecticut) → (Dominick Dunne, per:stateorprovince_of_tir^, Connecticut)	(Dunne, was born in 1925 in, Connecticut) → (Dominick Dunne, per:stateoBroVinCe-of_bir&, Connecticut)
SF13-ENG-044	Dunne was part of a famous family that also included his brother, novelist and screenwriter John Gregory Dunne; his brother’s wife, author Joan Didion; and his son, Griffin.		(His Brother, ,, Novelist) → (His brother, per:title, Novelist)
SF13-ENG-047	The women were accompanied by Reyna Luisa Tamayo, the mother of political prisoner Orlando Zapata, who died at age 42 in a hunger strike February 23 to protest prison conditions.	(Political Prisoner Orlando Zapata, ,, Reyna Luisa Tamayo) → (Orlando Zapata, per:children, Reyna Luisa Tamayo)	(Political Prisoner Orlando Zapata, ,, Reyna Luisa Tamayo) → (Orlando Zapata, per:children, Reyna Luisa Tamayo)
SF13-ENG-049	A professor emeritus at Yale University , Mandelbrot was born in Poland but as a child moved with his family to France where he was educated .	(Mandelbrot,	,,	Yale University) → (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:employee_or.member _of, Yale University)	(Mandelbrot, was born in, Poland) → (Benoit Mandelbrot, per:CoUntry_of_bir&, Poland)
SF13-ENG-058	Access Industries , a privately held company founded in 1986 by Len Blavatnik , has a diverse portfolio of investments in industry , real estate , media and telecom- munications .	(Access Industries,,, A Privately Held Company) → (Access IndUStrieS,properties, A Privately Held Company)	(Access Industries, founded in 1986 by, Len Blavatnik) → (Access Industries, org:founded_by, Len BlaVatoik)
SF13-ENG-061	InterContinental Hotels Group, owners of Holiday Inn Worldwide, has been ordered by a court to pay $25 million in damages to a franchisee for fraud.	(Intercontinental Hotels Group, ,, Holiday Inn Worldwide) → (InterConHnental Hotels Group, org:parents, Holiday Inn Worldwide)	(Intercontinental Hotels Group, ,, Holiday Inn Worldwide) → (InterContinental Hotels Group, org:parents, Holiday Inn Worldwide)
SF13-ENG-079	Water and its links to development, peace and conflict were key words in the an- nual sessions, Anders Berntell, executive director of Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI), said in his opening address.	(Stockholm International, director, Anders Berntell) → (Stockholm International Water Institute, per:top_members_or_employees, Anders Bemtell)	
SF13-ENG-079	Water and its links to development, peace and conflict were key words in the an- nual sessions, Anders Berntell, executive director of Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI), said in his opening address.	(Stockholm International,, executive director, Anders Bemtell) → (Stockholm In- ternaHonalWater Institute, per:top_members_or_employees, Anders Berntell)	(Stockholm International, , executive director, Anders Berntell) → (Stockholm In- ternaHonal Water Institute, per:top_members_or^employees, Anders Berntell)
SF13-ENG-090	ECO member countries include Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyr- gyzstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.	(Eco Member Countries, include, Azerbaijan) → (Economic Cooperation Organi- zation, org:members, Azerbaijan)	(Eco Member Countries, ,, Azerbaijan) → (Economic Cooperation Organization, org:members, Azerbaijan)
SF13-ENG-096	Freedom was founded in the 1930s by R.C. Hoiles and is still majority owned by the Hoiles family.	(Freedom, was founded in, The 1930S)→ (Freedom Communications, org:datefounded, 1930-XX-XX)	(Freedom, was founded in, The 1930S)→ (Freedom Communications, org:date_founded, 1930-XX-XX)
SF13-ENG-096	A phone message left Sunday at Freedom’s Irvine, California, headquarters was not immediately returned.		(Freedom’S Irvine, ,, California)→ (Freedom Communications, org:stateorprovince_of_headquarters, California)
SF13-ENG-097	STX Finland is part of the international STX Europe Group, with shipyards in Brazil, Norway, France, Romania and Vietnam.	(StX Finland, of, The International StX Europe Group)→ (STX Finland, org:subsidaries, The International Stx Europe Group)	(Stx Finland, of, The International Stx Europe Group)→ (STX Finland, org:subsidaries, The International Stx Europe Group)
Figure 9:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE vs. MAMA-GPT-2XL on TAC KBP.
20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts
Appropriate-Rural-TechnologyJnstitute	APPrOPriate Rural Technology InsUtUte APPrOPnate Rural Technology InSUtUte is an Indian non - gOVernmental orga- nization founded by a group of about 20 scientists and technologists to deVelop innoVatiVe and enVironmentally friendly rural technologies based on modern scientific knowledge in 1996 .	(Appropriate Rural Technology Institute, is, An Indian Non-GoVernmental Organization) → (appropri- ateruralJfchnologyjnstitute.Q16245764,countτy.PΓ7,india.Q668)
Ayatollah∕ReCOrd-PrOdueer)	Ayatollah Lamont Dorrell , known as Ayatollah , is a hip - hop record producer £om Queens , New York who has produced for predominantly New York - based rappers including Mos Def , Talib Kweli , R . A . The Rugged Man , Tragedy Khadafi , Wordsworth , Vast Aire , Afu - Ra , Guru , M . O . P . , Inspectah Deck , Cormega , Ghostface Killah as well as many others .	(Ayatollah, is, A Hip-Hop Record Producer) → (ayatollah√record-producer).Q4830984, OCCUPaHon.P106, record_producer.Q183945)
Benjamin-DarbeIet	Benjamin Darbelet Benjamin Darbeletis a French judoka .	(Benjamm Darbelet, is,AFrench Judoka) → (benjamin_darbelet.Q2456207,count,y_ofj?itizenship.P27, france.Q142); (Benjamm Darbelet,is,A French Judoka) → (benjamm_darbelelQ2456207, SPOrt.P641,judo.Q11420)
BharaLKhawas	He plays for club ThbhUVanArmy in Martyr ' S Memorial A - DiVision LeagIe as a st,⅛er.	^^(He,	plays, Club	TribhUVan~~Army)	→	(bharaLkhaWaS.Q4901128,	member-Of-SPOrtSjeam.P54,- nepal_army-club.Q6994327); (He, plays, Club TnbhUVan Army) → (bharaLkhaWaS.Q4901128, sport.P641, as- SOCiaHonfootball.Q2736)
-BilLWhiIe.(Shortstop)	White was born on May 1 , I860 m Bridgeport, Ohio , andhe began his professional baseball career in 1883 wi&&e PottsVille Antharcites ofthe International Association .	^^(White, in, Bridgeport) → (bill_white_(shortstop).Q4911357,place_of_birth.P19, bridgeport,,ohio.Q2062947)
Bob-Dylan.Q392	Dylan married Sara Lownds, who had worked as amodel and a secretary to DreWASSOCiateS, on NoVember 22,1965 .	(Dylan, married, Sara Lownds) → (BOb-Dylan.Q392, spouse.P26, Sara-LOwndS.Q457433)
-BOb-Dylan.Q392	In 1991 , Dylan receiVed a Grammy Lifetime AchieVement Award from American actor JackNicholson.	(Dylan, receiVed, Grammy Lifetime AchieVement Award) → (Bob_Dylan.Q392, awardJeceiVed.P166, Grammy_Lifetime_AchieVement_Award.Q935843)
Boog-PoweR	He also played for the CleVeland Indians and&e Los Angeles Dodgers.	(He, also played for the, CleVeland Indians) → (boogpowell.Q4942810, member-Of-SPOrtS-team.P54, CleVe- land_mdians.Q642553)
Boog-PoweR	He played in Major LeagIe Baseball as a first baseman and left fielder from throu^ , most notably as a member of the Baltimore Orioles dynasty that won four American League pennants and two World Series championships between 1966 and1971 .	(He, played, A First Baseman) → (boogpowell.Q4942810, posiUon_played_on_Uam_/_speciality.P413, first_baseman.Q1326154)
Bouchraya-Hammoudi-Bayoun	He studied Economics atthe UniVersity OfHaVana , Cuba .	(He, studied Economics, HaVana) → (bouchraya_hammoudi_bayoun.Q4949324, educated-at.P69, UniVer- sity OthaVana.Q837320)
Cezaro-RosseIti	Of Italian - Swiss deriVation , hewas born in Glasgow and liVed in Britain.	(He, was, Glasgow) → (cezaro_rossetti.Q2947206,place_of_birth.P19,glasgow.Q4093)
Chan-SaU-Ying	ChanSau Ying Chan Sau Yingis a retired athlete from HongKongwho specialised inthe 100 metres hurdles.	^^(ChanSau Ying,is,A RetiredAthlete) → (chan_sau_ying.Q21858345, sport.P641, sport_of_athletics.Q542)
ChlsHan-MCgIa&	He was born in the Bronx in1972 andbecame interested in art and i∏ustrahon as a Sman child .	^^(He, wasborn in,The Bronx) → (christian_mcgrath.Q5109897,place_of_birth.P19,the-bronx..Q18426)
ClifLMichslmors	He was a regjlar presenter on BBC1 ' s ” Holiday ” PrOgamme from 1969 to 1986 , and presented other shows for BBCTV,ITVandBBCRadio .	(He, was,A Regular Presenter) → (CIifLmiChelmore.Q5132704, occupation.P106,teleVision_presenter.Q947873)
CrookedJ	Crooked I DOmmiCk Antron Wickliffe , better known by his stage name Crooked I or Kxng Crooked , is anAmeπcan rapper from Long Beach , California .	(Kxng Crooked,,, An AmericanRapper) →(crooked-i.Q253695, count,y.of.citizenship.P27, United-StateS.Q30)
DeniseJohns	She g,aduatedin 2002, andmoVedto Atlanta , playing amateur beachVolleyball on theeastcoast OfAmerica.	(She,, playing, Amateur BeachVolleyball) → (denise_johns.Q5257690, SPOrt.P641,beach-Volleyball.Q4543)
Diana-Rast	She also COmPeted atthe 1996 Summer Olympics.	^^(She,~competed_at,~TOe~1996~Summer_Olympics)^^^→~(diana_rast.Q2491787,~ParUCiPanJof.P1344,- 1996-SUmmer-olympiCS.Q8531)
Eduard-Fnedrich-Poeppig	Eduard FriednCh Poeppig Eduard FriednCh Poeppigwas a German botanist ,zoolo艮St and explorer.	^^(Eduard Fnedrich,was,A GermanBotanist) → (eduard_friedrich_poeppig.Q61501, field_of_work.P101,botany.Q441)-
Edward-L--Romero	After the Vietnam war , he became a COUntyChairman of Democratic Party.	(A County Chairman, of, Democratic Party) → (edward_l._romero.Q5344025,member_of_political_party.P102, demo- cratic .party _(united_states).Q29552)
Endre.Tilli	Endre Tilli Endre Tilli was a HUngarian l⅛ncer.	(Endre Tilli, was, A HUngarian Fencer) → (endreJilli.Q1642140, COUntry-Of-CiHZenShiP.P27, hungary.Q28); (Endre Tilli, was, A Hungarian Fencer) → (endreJilli.Q1642140, sport.P641, fencing.Q12100)
Enrico.Pon,o	Porro COmPeted at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London where he won&e gold medal in GrecO - ROmanWreS址ng, the lightweight class.	(Porro, competed, The 1908 Summer Olympics) → (enπco-poκo.Q1343905, PartiCiPanJof.P1344, 1908_summer_olympics.Q8111)
Erfan.Zeneli	Erfan Zeneli ErfanZeneli is a FmniSh footballer OfKosoVar Albaniandescentwho cuπ,enUy plays for HJK Helsinki as a striker or left winger .	^^(ErfanZeneli, is, A Finnish Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367,country_of_citizenship.P27, finland.Q33); (Erfan- Zeneli, is, A HnniSh Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367, sport.P641, associahon_football.Q2736); (Erfan Zeneli, is, A Finnish Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367, country_fOr_sport.P1532, finland.Q33)
ErmmiO-FaVaIb	He then moVed to MantOVa before to join PaIermO , where he spent SeVen seasons as a ” rosanero ” mainstay .	(He, then moVed to, MantoVa) → (e!minio_faValli.Q1405871, member-Of-SPOrtS-team.P54, man- tOV^1911 s.s.d..Q430993)
George-Dowty	Dowty was born in Pershore , Worcestershire in 1901 .	(Dowty,wasborn in, Pershore) → (george_dowty.Q1507239, place_of_biith.P19, pershore.Q767858)
HaraldFairhair	In the Saga of Harald Fairhair in ” HeimSkrinma : which is the most elaborate al&ou呼 not the oldest or most reliable source to the life of Harald , it is written that Harald succeeded , on the death of his father Halfdan the Black GudrOdarson ,to the SOVerei映ty OfseVeral small, and somewhat scattered kingdoms in Vestfold, whichhadcome into his father ’ s hands through conquest and inheritance .	(Harald Fairhaκ, of his father, Halfdan the Black) → (harald_fairhair.Q206123, father.P22, half- dan_the_black.Q504932)
HectOr-Dyer	Born in Los Angeles, California , Hector Dyer enrolled at the Stanford UniVersity and won the IC4A championships in in1930 .	^^(Hector^^Dyer,^^enrolled at,^^The Stanford UniVersity) →^^(hector_dyer.Q1364518,^^educated_at.P69,^^Stan-- ford_uniVersity.Q41506)
Henny-Ma映USSen	Thanks to the support she receiVed , she was able to practise in all the courts of Denmark from 1909 , becoming ⅛e first woman to do so .	(The FirstWoman,,, Denmark) → (henny_ma^ussen.Q56577333, country_of_citEenship.P27, denmark.Q35)
Hma-PerVaiz-BUtt	Hina PerVaiz Butt Hina PerVaiz Butt is a Pakistani politician who was a Member of the ProVincial Assembly of the Punjab , since May 2013 .	^^(Hina PerVaiz Butt,is,A Pakistani Politician) → i^ina_perVaiz_butt.Q47918210, occupation.P106,politician.Q82955)-
Isabella_Of_Valois,-Duchess-Of-Bourbon	She was the wife OfPeter I, Duke OfBourbon .	(She, was the wife of, Peter I) → (isabella_of_Valois,_du?hess_of_bourbon.Q2363495, spouse.P26, pe- ter_i,_duke_of_bourbon.Q444668)
Jahir-BUtrOn	Then from1995 , heplayed for PeruVianSecond DiVision side Guardia Republicana .	(He, played for, PeruVian Second DiVision Side Guardia Republicana) → (jahir_butrOn.Q6123259, mem- ber_of_sports_team.P54, gjardia_repubIiCana.Q5614012)
Jahir-ButrOn	Jahir Butrfn Jahir BUtrOn Gotuzzo is a PeruVian footballer who plays as acenter back .	^^(JahirButrOn Gotuzzo,is,APeruVianFootbaΠer) → (jahir_butrOn.Q6123259,country_of_citizenship.P27,peru.Q419);- (Jahir ButrOn Gotuzzo,is, A PeruVian Footballer) → (jahir_butrOn.Q6123259, sport.P641, association_fOotbaR.Q2736)
Joan-Of-France-Duchess-Of-Berry	She was the second dau呼ter of King Louis XI of France and of his second wife CharIOtte of SaVOy ; her SurViVmg siblings were King Charles VIII of France and Anne of France .	(She, was the second dau呼ter, King Louis Xi) → (joan_of_france,,duchess_of_berry.Q236220, father.P22, loUiS-Xi-offrance.Q8058)
-JOhn-O艮IVie-(Footballer)	He played for Hibs in⅛eir most successful erarenowned for theκ S1OntfiVe known as The Famous Five .	^^(He,playedfor, Hibs) → (john_ogiVie_(footballer).Q6251147,member_of_sports_team.P54,hibernian_f.c..Q192597)-
JOhnedeI-CardeI	He moVed to Sta .	^^(He,to,Sta) → (johnedeLcardel.Q56599981,member-of-sportsJeam.P54, sta.」UCiaJealtors.Q3547751)
Joseph-Wr-Nega	JosephW .NegaJosephW .Negais a Judge of⅛e United States Tax Court.	(JosephW.Nega,is,A Judge) → (joseph_w._nega.Q16733242, occupation.P106,judge.Q16533)
JosS-Alejandro-Agjilar-L6pez	Josf Alejandro AgJiIar LOpez Jose Alejandro AgJiIar Lfpez is a MexicanpoliUcian £om&e National Action Party.	(Jose Alejandro AgjiIar Lfpez, is, A Mexican Politician) → (jOse_alejandro_aguJar」Opez.Q18385891, COUntJy-Of-CiHZenShiP.P27, mexico.Q96); (Josf Alejandro AgjiIar Lfpez, is, A Mexican Politician) → (josf_alejandro_a^ilar_lOpez.Q18385891, occupation.P106, poliUcian.Q82955); (Jose Alejandro AgjiIar LOpez, Mexican politician, The National Action Party) → (josf_alejandro_a^ilar_lOpez.Q18385891, mem- ber_of_poliUcal_party.P102, naHonal_acHon_party_(mexiCO).Q851087)
Juan-BauUsta-Azopardo	Juan BauUsta Azopardo was bom in Sen^ea , Malta , the son of Rosina and SalVatore Azopardo .	(Juan BauUsta Azopardo, ,, Malta) → (juan bautist.a azopardo.Q3805864, COUntJy-Of-CiHZenShiP.P27, malta.Q233); (Juan BauUsta Azopardo, was born, Senmea) → (juan_bautista_azopardo.Q3805864, place_of_bir&.P19, Sen- glea.Q846593)
-KeVin-Kerr-(SCOtUshJootballer)	He Si映ed for AGOVV Apeldoorn of Netherlands ' EerSte DiVisie in January 2012 after his contract in Bielefeld had expired the preVious summer.	(He, Si映ed for, AgOvV Apeldoorn) → ⅛eVin-kerr√scottish-fOotbaΠer).Q326761, member_of_sports_team.P54, agoVV-apeldoom.Q292618)
LaCheZar-KOteV	Lachezar KOteV Lachezar KOteViS a Bulgarian footballer who plays as a midfielder for VitOSha BiStritSa .	(Lachezar KOteV, is, A Bulgarian Footballer) → (IaCheZar-koteV.Q49560773, sport.P641, association_football.Q2736); (Lachezar KOteV, is, A Midfielder) → (IaCheZar-koteV.Q49560773, posiUon_played_onJeam_/_speciality.P413, mid- fielder.Q193592)
MarC-ZenO	In 1988 , Zeno was drafted in ⅛e 7⅛ round by ⅛e Pittsburgh Steelers.	(Zeno, was drafted in the, The PittSbUr呼 SteeIerS) → (marc_zeno.Q16196353, member-Of-SPorts_team.P54, pitts- burgh_steelers.Q191477)
Marcel-Dheere	Marcel Dheere Marcel Albert ” Ching” Dheere was a Canadianprofessional ice hockey forwardwho played11 games in the National Hockey League for the Montreal Canadiens .	(Marcel Albert "Ching, in, A Canadian Professional Ice Hockey) → (marcel.dheere.Q6756083, coun- t,y_of_citizenship.P27, canada.Q16); (The National Hockey Leagie, for, The Montreal Canadiens) → (marcel_dheere.Q6756083, member_of_sports_team.P54, mont,eal.canadiens.Q188143); (A Canadian Profes- sional Ice Hockey, played, The National Hockey LeagIe) → (marcel.dheere.Q6756083, IeagIe.P118, na- HOnal-hockey」eagie.Q1215892); ∣Marcel Albert "Ching, played, A Canadian Professional Ice Hockey) → (mar- cel_dheere.Q6756083, sport.P641,ice_hockey.Q41466)
Mark-SChultZ-(WreSUer)	MarkSChul乜 was bom in1960 in Palo Alto , California to Dorothy JeanSt. Germam and Philip Gary SChul乜.	^^(Mark Schultz, was bom in 1960 in, Dorothy Jean St.	Germam) → (mark_schultz.(wresfler).Q3487332,- place-Of-bir⅛.P19, palo_alto,_califomia.Q47265)
MichaelJoneS-(Footballer)	Michael Jones Michael Jones is an EnmiSh footballer, who plays for Cefn Druids.	(Michael Jones, is, An EnmiSh Footballer) → (michael-jones√fOotballer).Q6831707, sport.P641, associa- Uon_football.Q2736)
Mike-BenOtU	He is an alumnus of the Delta Siaa Phi fraternity.	^^(He, is an alumnus of, The Delta Si^a Phi Fraternity) → (mike_bellotU.Q14950800, educated_at.P69, califor-- nia StatejJniVerSityJaSLbay.Q1026916)
OIga-SSmsnoVa-Tyan-Shanskaya	She learnedto play chess at&e age of18 ; four years late, she won the L-ening,ad city women ' S chess championship .	(She, to play, Chess) → (olga_semenoVa_tyan-shanskaya.Q2392240, sport.P641,chess.Q718)
OWen-PaterSOn	Owen PaterSOn Owen William PaterSOn is a British COnSerVatVe Party politician who was the Secretary of State for EnVironment, Food andRural Affairs from 2012to 2014 .	(Owen PaterSon, is, A BriHSh COnSerVatVe Party Politician) → (owen_PaterSon.Q197894, OCCUPaHon.P106, poliU- cian.Q82955)
Pan GOngSheng	Pan Gongsheng Pan Gongshengis a Chinese economist, banker, reformist andbureaucrat.	(Pan Gongsheng, is, A Chinese Economist) → (pan_gongsheng.Q9309080, country OfjcitiZenShiP.P27,chrna.Q148)
Paul Carrington (American Football)	Paul Carnn陵on Paul Carrm陵on is a former American football defensiVe end .	(Paul Camn陵on,iS,A Former American Football DefensiVe End) → (PaUl-Carringon-(american-football).Q9057011, SPOrlP641, american_football.Q41323)
PeterJebSen	Peter Jebsen Pete, Jebsen wasa Norwe⅛an businessperson andpoliUcian.	(Peter Jebsen, was, A NOrWe艮an Businessperson) → (Peter-jebsen.Q1774966, COuntry-OfJciHzenShiP.P27, nor- way.Q20); (Peter Jebsen, was, A Norwe⅛an Businessperson) → (Peter-jebsen.Q1774966, OCCUPaHon.P106, busi- nessperson.Q43845); (Peter Jebsen, was, Politician) → (Peter-jebsen.Q1774966, OCCUPation.P106,poliUCian.Q82955)
Pina-PiOVani	Pina PioVani Pina PioVani was an Italian stage and film actress.	(Pina PiOVani, was, An Itaban Stage And Film ACtreSS) → (Pina-PiOVani.Q3388583, COuntJy-OLciHZenShiP.P27, italy.Q38)
RoberLG-Cole	Rapidly adVanCingthIOU呼 ⅛eranks at Fort BennJmg as the ParaChUteinfantrybattaliOnS wereexpandedto re⅛ments, he was a lieutenant colonel commanding the 3rd Battalion ofthe 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment on June 6 , 1944 , the date of his unit ’ s first combat jump .	(He, was,A Lieutenant Colonel) → (robert_g..cole.Q969944,military_rank.P410,lieutenanLcolonel.Q493898)
RoberLHolLCarpenter	RobertHolt CarPenter Robert HoltCarpenterwas aNewZealandbookbinder ,local poliUcian,bookseller andcharacter .	(Robert Holt CarPenter, was, A New Zealand Bookbmder) → (roberLholLcarpente,.Q7345593, coun- t,y_of_citizenship.P27, new_zealand.Q664)
-RoberLVan.Boxel	He joined amateur side FC Lisse in summer 2015 from Sparta .	^^(He, joined, AmateUr Side FC LiSSe) → (roberLVan-boxel.Q2017870, member-Of-SPOrtSjeam.P54, f⅛-liSse.Q978325)-
RolfMaurer	RolfMaurer RolfMaurer was a Swiss road racingcyclistwhocompet⅛dprofessionally between1960 and1969 .	(Rolf Maurer, was, A Swiss Road Racing Cyclist) → (rolf_maurer.Q870132, COuntJy-OfjciHZenShiP.P27, switzerland.Q39); (Rolf Maurer, was, A Swiss Road Racing Cyclist) → (rolf_maurer.Q870132, sport.P641, road_bicycle_racmg.Q3609)
Ron.Maudsley	Maudsley wasbornin Lostock Gralam, Cheshire , andeduCated atMalVern College and Birmingham UniVersity ,then serVed in the Royal Army SerVice Corps during World War II .	(Maudsley, was born in, Lostock Gralam) → (ron_maudsley.Q16009653,	place-of-bir⅛.P19, lo- stockgralam.Q4640202)
SafaR-Sfi	Safa al - Safi Safa al - Dm Mohammed al - Safi is an Iraqi politician and former Justice MiniSter who is currently Minister of State for the Council of RepresentatiVes .	(MohammedAl-Safi, is, An Iraqi Politician) → (Safa-al-sfi.Q7398343, OCCUPaHon.P106, poliUcian.Q82955)
SalVador Luria	In 1959 , he became chair OfMicrobiology at&e Massachusetts InsUtUte OfTechnology.	(He, became chair of, Microbiology) → (SaIVador_lUria.Q205667, field of work.P101, microbiology.Q7193)
SaneIe-VaVae-TUiIa艮	He now plays for US Carcassonne .	(He, now plays, Us Carcassonne) → (SaneIe-VaVaeJUiIa艮.Q3472139,	member_of_sports_team.P54, US-CarCaSSonne.Q3550526)
Seth-Plum	Se& Plum Se& Lewis Plum was an EnmiShinternaHOnal footballer who played as a winghalf.	(Se& Lewis Plum, was, An Enmish International Footballer) → (Sethψlum.Q7456581, sport.P641, associa- Uon_football.Q2736); (Seth Lewis Plum, was, An Enmish International Footballer) → (se&_plum.Q7456581, mem- ber-Of_sportS-team.P54, en^and_national_football_Uam.Q47762)
Sofija-Korkutyte	Sofija KOrkUtyte Sofija Korkutyte was a Lithuanian rower who won th,ee European HtIeS in the e睁ts eVent in 1963 , 1965 and 1967; ShefiniShed SecOndm 1964 and1966 .	^^(SofijaKorkutyK, was,A Lithuanian Rower) → (sofija_korkutyte.Q16014909, sport.P641,rowing(sport).Q159354)
ThOmaS-R。映e	He madehis first start for CeIHC at home against Dundee Unitedin a1-0 Victory on 20 February 2010, heplayedVery well and impressed the coach Tony Mowbray .	(He, at, CeIUC) → (&omas_ro映e.Q609801,member-of-sportsJeam.P54,celUc-f.c..Q19593)
Un-AVnery	AVnery was born in Beckum, near MUnSter in Westphalia , as Helmut OStermann , the youngest of four children , to a well - established German Jewish family, his father being a priVat≤ banker in thetown.	^^(WeStPhalmnrBecEm)^
UrSula-Lehr	She was a member ofthe Christian Democratic Union .	(She, of, The Christian Democratic Union) → (UrSUlajehr.Q290708, member-Of-Political-party.P102, chris- Uan.democratic_union_of_germany.Q49762)
ValdfVia-(Brazilian-Footballer)	ValdfVia Wanderson Ferreira de OliVeira , commonly known as ValdfVia , is a Brazilian footballer who plays as an attackingmidfielder for AVaf, on loan from Intemacional.	^^(A BraZiIian Footballer,who plays as,AnAttackmgMidfielder) → (Valdl'Via√brazilian-fOotballer).Q18176477, POsi-- UOn-PIayed-OnJeamJ-SPeciality.P413,midfielder.Q193592)
Victor-Franc OiS,-2Nd-DuC-De-BrOmie	His Victory OVer Prince Ferdinand at Bergen won him the rank of marshal of France from the RenCh King Louis XV and the title of Prince ofthe Holy Roman Empire ” ReichsfUrst ” from Holy Roman Emperor F,ancis I . In 1759 , he won the Battle of Bergen and followed that with the capture the city of Minden , later fighting at the Battle of Minden under the command of Contades , whom he would succeed in command .	(His Victory, won him the, Marshal) → (Victor-francois,_2nd_duc_de_bro^ie.Q695929, award_reCeived.P166, mar- ShalS-OfJfanCe.Q474485)
Figure 10:	Mapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE on Wikidata.
21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
		
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts
Appropriate-Rural-TechnologyJnstitute	Appropriate Rural Technology InsUtUte Appropriate Rural Technology InSHnIte is an Indian non-gOVernmental organi- zation founded by a group of about 20 scientists and technologists to deVelop innoVatiVe and enVironmentally friendly rural technologies based on modern scientific knowledge in 1996.	(Appropriate Rural Technology Institute, is, An Indian Non-GoVernmental Organization) → (appropri- aterural-technology-insUtute.Q16245764,counU∙y.P17,india.Q668)
Ayatollah∕ReCOrd-PrOdueer)	Ayatollah Lamont Don,ell, known as Ayato∏ah,is a hip-hop record producer from Queens, New York who has produced for predominantly New York-based rappers including Mos Def, Talib Kweli, R.A. The Rugged Man, Tragedy Khadafi, Wordsworth, Vast Aire, Afu-Ra, Guru, M.O.P., Inspectah Deck, Cormega, Ghostface Killah as well as many others.	(Ayatollah, is, A Hip-Hop Record Producer) → (ayatollah√record-producer).Q4830984, OCCUPaHon.P106, record_producer.Q183945)
Benjamin-DarbeIet	Benjamin Darbelet Benjamin Darbeletis a French judoka.	(Benjamm Darbelet, is,AFrench Judoka) → (benjamin_darbelet.Q2456207,count,y_ofj?itizenship.P27, france.Q142); (Benjamm Darbelet,is,A French Judoka) → (benjamm_darbelelQ2456207, SPOrt.P641,judo.Q11420)
BharaLKhawas	He plays for club ThbhUVanArmy in Martyr,s Memorial A-DiViSiOn LeagIe as a striker.	^^(He,~~plays_for,	Club_THbhUVan_Army)^^^→~(bharaLkhaWaS.Q4901128,~~member-Of-SPOrtSJeam.P54,- nepal_army_club.Q6994327); (He, plays for, Club TribhuVan Army) → (bharaLkhaWaS.Q4901128, sport.P641, association_fOotball.Q2736)
-BilLWhiIe.(Shortstop)	White was born on May 1, I860 in Bridgeport, Ohio, and he began his professional baseba∏ career in 1883 with the PottsVille Antharcites ofthe International Association.	^^(White, in, Bridgeport) → (bill_white_(shortstop).Q4911357,place_of_birth.P19, bridgeport,,ohio.Q2062947)
Bob-Dylan.Q392	Dylan married Sara Lownds, who had worked as amodel and a secretary to DrewAssociates, on NoVember 22,1965 .	(Dylan, married, Sara Lownds) → (BOb-Dylan.Q392, spouse.P26, Sara-LOwndS.Q457433)
-BOb-Dylan.Q392	In 1991 , Dylan receiVed a Grammy Lifetime AchieVement Award from American actor JackNicholson.	(Dylan, receiVed, A Grammy Lif⅛Ume AchieVement Award) → (Bob_Dylan.Q392, awardJeceiVed.P166, Grammy-Lif⅛Hme-AchieVement-Award.Q935843)
Boog-PoweR	He also played for the CleVeland Indians and&e Los Angeles Dodgers.	(He, also played for, The CleVeland Indians) → (boogpoweΠ.Q4942810, member-Of-SPorts_team.P54, CleVe- land_mdians.Q642553)
Boog-PoweR	He played in Major LeagIe Baseball as a first baseman and left fielder from thou呼,most notably as a member of the Baltimore Orioles dynasty that won four American League pennants and two World Series championships between 1966 and1971.	(He, played in, A Hrst Baseman) → (boogpoweΠ.Q4942810, posiUon_played_on_Uam_/_speciality.P413, first_baseman.Q1326154)
Bouchraya-Hammoudi-Bayoun	He studied Economics at&e UniVersity OfHaVana, Cuba.	(He, studied, UniVersity of HaVana) → (bouchraya_hammoudi_bayoun.Q4949324, educated_alP69, UniVer- Sity-OthaVana.Q837320)
Cezaro-RosseIti	Of Italian-Swiss deriVation, he was born in Glasgow and IiVed in Britain.	(He, wasborn in, Glasgow) → (cezaro_rossetti.Q2947206,place_of_birth.P19, glasgow.Q4093)
Chan-SaU-Ying	ChanSau Ying Chan Sau Yingis a retired athlete from HongKongwho specialised m&e 100 metres hurdles.	^^(Sau Ying,is,A ReUredAtMete) → (chan_sau_ying.Q21858345, sport.P641, sport_of_atMetics.Q542)
ChlsHan-MCgIa&	He was born in the Bronx in1972 andbecame interested in art and i∏ustrahon as a SmalI child.	^^(He, wasborn in,The Bronx) → (christian_mcgrath.Q5109897,place_of_birth.P19,the-bronx..Q18426)
-Cliff.Michslmors	He was a regular presenter on BBC1's "Hobday” PrOgIamme from 1969 to 1986, and PreSented Other shows for BBC TV,ITV and BBC Radio.	^^(He,was,A Regular Presenter) → (cliff_michelmore.Q5132704, occupation.P106,teleVision_presenter.Q947873)
CrookedJ	Crooked I Dominick AntrOn Wickliffe , better known by his stage name Crooked I or Kxng Crooked, is an American rapper from Long Beach, California.	(Crooked I, is, An American Rapper) → (crooked_i.Q253695, count,y-of-citizenship.P27, United_states.Q30)
DeniseJohns	She gaduatedin 2002, and moVed to Atlanta, playing amateur beach Volleyball on Meeastcoast OfAmerica.	(She, playing, Amateur BeachVolleyball) → (denise_johns.Q5257690, SPOrt.P641,beach-Volleyball.Q4543)
Diana-M.-Fennell	FenneU was born in Emporia, Vir⅛nia and attended ⅛e public schools there.	(Fennell, was born in, Emporia) → (diana_m._fennell.Q28037279, PIaCe-ofbirth.P19, empoπa,-Vir艮nia.Q177678)
Diana-RaSt	She also COmPeted at&e 1996 Summer Olympics.	(She, also COmPeted at, The 1996 Summer Olympics) → (diana_rast.Q2491787, ParUCipant_of.P1344, 1996-SUmmer-olympiCS.Q8531)
Eduard-Fnedrich-Poeppig	Eduard FriednCh Poeppig Eduard FriednCh Poeppigwas a German botanist, zoolo艮St andexplorer.	(Eduard Friedrich, was, A GermanBotanist) → (eduard_friedrich_poeppig.Q61501, field_of work.P101,botany.Q441)
Edward-L--Romero	After &e Viemam war, he became a COUntyChaUIman of Democratic Party.	(He, of, Democratic Party) → (edward_l._romero.Q5344025, member-Of-Politcal-party.P102, demo- cratic .party _(united_states).Q29552)
Endre.Tilli	Endre Tilli Endre Tilli was a HUngarian l⅛ncer.	(Endre Tilli, was, A HUngarian Fencer) → (endreJilli.Q1642140, COUntry-Of-CiHzenShiP.P27, hungary.Q28); (Endre Tilli, was, A Hungarian Fencer) → (endreJilli.Q1642140, sport.P641, fencing.Q12100)
Enrico.Pon,o	Porro COmPeted at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London where he won the gold medal in Greco-Roman WreSUing, the lightweight class.	(Porro, COmPeted at, The 1908 Summer Olympics) → (enrico.pon,o.Q1343905, ParUCiPanL-of.P1344, 1908-Summer_olympics.Q8111)
Erfan _ZeneIi	Erfan Zeneli ErfanZeneli is a FmniSh footballer OfKosoVar Albaniandescentwho cuπ,enUy plays for HJK Helsinki as a striker or left winger.	^^(ErfanZeneli, is, A Finnish Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367,country_of_citizenship.P27, finland.Q33); (Erfan- Zeneli, is, A HnniSh Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367, sport.P641, association_football.Q2736); (Erfan Zeneli, is, A Finnish Footballer) → (erfan_zeneli.Q2053367, country_fOr_sport.P1532, finland.Q33)
ErmmiO-FaVaIb	He then moVed to MantOVa before to join Palermo, where he spent SeVen seasons as a "rosanero"mainstay.	(He, then moVed to, MantOVa) → (e!minio_faValli.Q1405871, member-Of-SPOrtS-team.P54, man- tOV^1911-S.s.d..Q430993)
George-Dowty	Dowty was born in Pershore, Worcestershire in1901.	^^(Dowty,wasbornin, Pershore) → (george_dowty.Q1507239,place_of_bttth.P19,pershore.Q767858)
HaraldFairhair	In the Saga OfHarald Fairhair in "Hamsknnga"，which is ⅛e most elaborate al&ou呼 not the oldest or most reliable SOUrCe to&elil⅛ OfHarald, it is Wntten that Harald succeeded, on&edea& ofhis father Halfdan&e Black GudrOdarson, to the soVereignty of seVeral small, and somewhat scattered kingdoms in Vestfold, which had come into his father’s hands through conquest and inheritance.	(Harald, ofhis father, Halfdan the Black) → (haraldJairha⅛.Q206123, father.P22, halfdan_the_black.Q504932)
HectOr-Dyer	Born in Los Angeles, California, Hector Dyer enrolled at the Stanford UniVersity and won the IC4A championships in in 1930.	^^(Hector Dyer, at,TheStanfordUniVersity) → (hector_dyer.Q1364518,educated_at.P69, stanford_uniVersity.Q41506)
Henny-Ma映USSen	Thanks to the support ShereceiVed, she was able to practise in all the courts OfDenmark from 1909, becoming&e first woman to do so.	(She,, she, Denmark) → (henny_ma^ussen.Q56577333, countfy_of_ciUzenship.P27, denmark.Q35)
Hma-PerVaiz-BUtt	Hina PerVaiz Butt Hina PerVaiz Butt is a Pakistani politician who was a Member of the ProVincial Assembly of the Punjab, SinceMay 2013.	^^(Hina PerVaiz Butt,is,A Pakistani Politician) → φina.perVaiz.butt.Q47918210, occupation.P106,politician.Q82955)-
Isabella_Of_Valois,-Duchess-Of-Bourbon	She was the wife OfPeter I, Duke of Bourbon.	(She, was the wife of, Peter I) → (isabella_of_Valois,_du?hess_of_bourbon.Q2363495, spouse.P26, pe- ter_i,_duke_of_bourbon.Q444668)
Jahir-ButrOn	Then from1995, he played for PeruVian Second DiVision side Guardia Republicana.	(He, played for, PeruVian Second DiVision Side Guardia Republicana) → (jahir-but,On.Q6123259, mem- ber-Of-sportS-team.P54, giardia_repubIiCana.Q5614012)
Jahir-ButrOn	Jahir Butrfn Jahir BUtrOn Gotuzzo is a PeruVian footballer who plays as acenter back.	^^(JahirButrOn Gotuzzo,is,APeruVianFootbaΠer) → (jahir_butTOn.Q6123259,country_of_citizenship.P27,peru.Q419);- (Jahir But,On Gotuzzo,is, A PeruVian Footballer) → (jahir-but,On.Q6123259, sport.P641, association-fOotbaΠ.Q2736)
Janina-Altman	In 1950, Hescheles emig'at≤d to Israel,where she eVentuallyearned a doctoratein ChemiStry atTechnion.	(She, earned a doctorate in, Technion) →	(janina_altman.Q22574794,	educated_at.P69,	tech- nion_--israel_instituteof.Jechnology.Q333705)
Joan-Of-France-Duchess-Of-Berry	She was the second dau呼ter of King Louis XI of France and ofhis second wife Charlotte of SaVoy; her SurViVmg SibImgS were King Charles VIII OfFrance and Anne of F,ance.	(She, was the second dau^ter of, King Louis Xi) → (joan-ofJfanCe,-duchess-Of-beπy.Q236220, father.P22, loUiS-Xi offrance.Q8058)
John_O^lvie_(Footballer)	He played for Hibs in⅛eir most successful erarenowned for theκ front fiVe known as The Famous FiVe.	(He, playedfor, Hibs) → (john_ogiVie_(footballer).Q6251147,member_of_sports_team.P54,hibernian_f.c..Q192597)
JOhnedeI-CardeI	He moVed to Sta.	^^(He,moVedto,Sta) → (johnedeLcardel.Q56599981,member-of-sportsJeam.P54, sta.」UCia-realtors.Q3547751)
Joseph-Wr-Nega	-JosephW.Nega JosephW.Negais aJudgeofthe United StatesTax. Court.	^^(JosephW.Nega,is,A Judge) → (joseph_w._nega.Q16733242, occupatjon.P106,judge.Q16533)
Jose_Alejandro_Agjilar_L6pez	Josf Alejandro AgJiIar Lopez Jose Alejandro AgJiIar Lfpez is a MexicanpoliUcian £om&e National Action Party.	(Josef Alejandro Aguilar Lofpez, is a Mexican politician, The National Action Party) → (josf_alejandro_a^ilar_lOpez.Q18385891, member-Of-PoliHcaLparty.P102, naHonal_acHon_party_(mexiCo).Q851087); (Jose Alejandro AgjiIar Lfpez, is, A Mexican Politician) → (jOse_alejandro_aguJar」Opez.Q18385891, COUntjy-Of-CiHzenShiP.P27, mexico.Q96); (Josf Alejandro AgJiIar Lfpez, is, A Mexican Politician) → (josf_alejandro_aguilar_lOpez.Q18385891, OCCUPaUon.P106,poliUCian.Q82955)
Juan-BauUsta-Azopardo	Juan BauUsta Azopardo was bom in Sen^ea, Malta, the son of Rosina and SalVatore Azopardo.	(Juan BauUsta Azopardo, was born in, Senmea) → (juan_bautista_azopardo.Q3805864, place_of_bir&.P19, Sen- gea.Q846593); (Juan BauUsta Azopardo, was born in, Malta) → (juan_bautista_azopardo.Q3805864, coun- try_of_citizenship.P27, malta.Q233)
-KeVin-Kerr-(SCOtUshJootballer)	He Si映ed for AGOVV Apeldoorn of Netherlands' EerSte DiVisie in January 2012 after his contract in Bielefeld had expired the preVious summer.	(He, Si映ed for, AgOvV Apeldoorn) → ⅛eVin-kerr√scottish-fOotbaΠer).Q326761, member_of_sports_team.P54, agoVV-apeldoom.Q292618)
Lachezar KOteV	Lachezar KOteV Lachezar KOteViS a Bulgarian footballer who plays as a midfielder for VitOsha Bistritsa.	(Lachezar KOteV, is, A Bulgarian Footballer) → (IaChezar_koteV.Q49560773, sport.P641, association_fOotball.Q2736)
MarC-ZenO	In 1988,Zeno was drafted in⅛e 7⅛roundby ⅛e Pittsburgh Steelers.	(Zeno, by, The Pittsburgh Steelers) → (marc_zeno.Q16196353, member-Of-SPOrtSjeam.P54, pitts- burgh_steelers.Q191477)
Marcel-Dheere	Marcel Dheere Marcel Albert "Ching" Dheere was a Canadian professional ice hockey forward who played 11 games in the National Hockey League for the Montreal Canadiens.	(Marcel Albert "Ching, was, A Canadian Professional Ice Hockey) → (marcel_dheere.Q6756083, coun- t,y_of_citizenship.P27, canada.Q16); (Marcel Albert "Ching, was, A Canadian Professional Ice Hockey) → (mar- cel_dheere.Q6756083, sport.P641, ice_hockey.Q41466); (Marcel Albert "Ching, for, The Montreal Canadiens) → (marcel_dheere.Q6756083, member-Of-SPortS-team.P54, mont,eal.canadiens.Q188143)
MarkSChultZ-(WreSUer)	MarkSChul乜 was bom in1960 in Palo Alto, CaUforniato Dorothy Jean St. Germam and Philip Gary SChul乜.	^^(Mark Schultz, was born in 1960 in, Palo Alto) → (mark_schultz_(wresUer).Q3487332, place_of_birth.P19,- palo_alto_california.Q47265)
MichaelJones-(Footballer)	Michael Jones Michael Jones is an Enmish footballer, who plays for Cefn Druids.	(Michael Jones, is, An EnmiSh Footballer) → (michael-jones√fOotballer).Q6831707, sport.P641, associa- Uon_football.Q2736)
Olga Semenova Tyan-ShanSkaya	She learnedto play chess at the age of18; four years late, she won the L-ening,ad city women,s chess championship.	(She, learned, Chess) → (olga SemenOVa tyan-shanskaya.Q2392240, sport.P641,chess.Q718)
OWen-PaterSOn	Owen PaterSOn Owen William PaterSOn is a British COnSerVatVe Party politician who was the Secretary of State for EnVironment, Food and RuralAffairs from2012to 2014.	(Owen William Paterson, is, A British ConserVatiVe Party Politician) → (oWenPaterSon.Q197894, occupation.P106, politician.Q82955)
Pan-GOngSheng	Pan Gongsheng Pan Gongshengis a Chinese economist, banker, reformist and bureaucrat.	(Pan Gongsheng, is, A Chinese Economist) → (pan_gongsheng.Q9309080, count,y.of.citizenship.P27, chrna.Q148)
Paul Carrington (American Football)	Paul Carnn陵on Paul Carrm陵on is a former American football def⅛nsiVe end.	(Paul Camn陵on,iS,A Former American Football DefensiVe End) → (paul_carrington_(american_football).Q9057011, SPOrIP641, american_football.Q41323)
PeterJebSen	Peter Jebsen Pete, Jebsen wasa Norwe⅛an businessperson andpoliUcian.	(Peter Jebsen, was, A NOrWe艮an Businessperson) → (Peter-jebsen.Q1774966, COUntry-OfJciHzenShiP.P27, nor- way.Q20); (Peter Jebsen, was, A Norwe⅛an Businessperson) → (Peter-jebsen.Q1774966, OCCUPaHon.P106, busi- nessperson.Q43845)
Pina-PiOVani	Pina PioVani Pina PioVani was an Italian stage and film actress.	(Pina PiOVani, was, An Itaban Stage And Film ACtreSS) → (Pina-PiOVani.Q3388583, COUntjy-OLciHzenShiP.P27, italy.Q38)
RoberLG-Cole	Rapidly adVancmg⅛rou呼&e ranks at Fort Benning as the ParaChUte infantry battalions wereexpandedto re⅛ments, he was a lieutenant colonel commanding the 3rd Battalion ofthe 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment on June 6, 1944, the date of his unit,s first combat jump.	(He, was,A Lieutenant Colonel) → (robert_g..cole.Q969944,military_rank.P410,lieutenanLcolonel.Q493898)
RoberLHolLCarpenter	RobertHolt CarPenter Robert HoltCarpenUr wasaNew ZealandbookbmderJocal PObHCian, bookseller and character.	(Robert Holt CarPenter, was, A New Zealand Bookbmder) → (roberLholLcarpente,.Q7345593, coun- t,y_of_citizenship.P27, new_zealand.Q664)
-RoberLVan.Boxel	He joined amateur side FC Lisse in summer 2015 from Sparta.	^^(He, joined, AmateUr Side FC LiSSe) → (roberLVan-boxel.Q2017870, member-Of-SPOrtSjeam.P54, f⅛-hsse.Q978325)-
RolflMaurer	RolfMaurer RolfMaurer was a Swiss road racingcyclistwhocompet⅛dprofessionally between1960 and1969.	(Rolf Maurer, was, A Swiss Road Racing Cyclist) → (rolf_maurer.Q870132, COUntjy-OLciHzenShiP.P27, switzerland.Q39); (Rolf Maurer, was, A Swiss Road Racing Cyclist) → (rolf_maurer.Q870132, sport.P641, road_bicycle_racmg.Q3609)
Ron-Maudsley	Maudsley was born in Lostock Gralam, Cheshire, and educated at MaIvem College and Bimn呼am UniVersity, then SerVed in the Royal ArmySerVice COrPS duringWorld War II.	(Maudsley, was born in, Lostock Gralam) → (ron_maudsley.Q16009653,	place-of-bir⅛.P19, lo- stockgralam.Q4640202)
SafaR-Sfi	Safa al-Safi Safa al-DinMohammed al-Safi is an Iraqi politician and former Justice Minister who is currently MmisUr of State for the Council of RepresentatiVes.	(MohammedAl-Safi, is, An Iraqi Politician) → (Safa-al-sfi.Q7398343, OCCUPaHon.P106, poliUcian.Q82955)
SalVadOr-LUria	In 1959, he becamechair OfMicrobiology at the Massachusetts Institute OfTechnology .	(He, became chair of, Microbiology) → (SaIVador」uria.Q205667, field_of_work.P101, microbiology.Q7193)
SaneIe-VaVae-TUiIa艮	He now plays for US Carcassonne.	(He, now plays for, Us Carcassonne) → (SaneIe-VaVae_tuila艮.Q3472139, member_of_sports_team.P54, US-CarCaSSonne.Q3550526)
Seth-Plum	Se& Plum Se& Lewis Plum was an EnmiShinternaHOnal footballer who played as a winghalf.	(Se& Lewis Plum, was, An Enmish International Footballer) → (Sethψlum.Q7456581, sport.P641, associa- Uon_football.Q2736); (Seth Lewis Plum, was, An Enmish International Footballer) → (se&_plum.Q7456581, mem- ber-Of-sportS-team.P54, en^and_national_football_Uam.Q47762)
Sofija-Korkutyte	Sofija KOrkUtyte Sofija KOrkUtyte was a Lithuanian rower who won th,ee European HtIeS in the ei^ts eVent in 1963, 1965 and 1967; she finished secondin1964 and 1966.	^^(SofijaKorkutyK, was,A Lithuanian Rower) → (sofija_korkutyte.Q16014909, sport.P641,rowing(sport).Q159354)
ThOmaS-R。映e	He made his first start for Celtic at home against Dundee United in a 1-0 Victory on 20 February 2010, he played Very well and impressed the coach Tony Mowbray.	(He, madehis first start for, CeIUC) → (&omas_ro映e.Q609801,member-Of-sportSjeam.P54,celUC-fc..Q19593)
Un-AVnery	AVnery was born in Beckum, near MUnSter in Westphalia, as HeImUt Ostermann, &e youngest of four children, to a well-established German Jewish family, his father being a priVate banker in the town.	(AVnery, born in, Beckum) → (Uri-aVnery.Q325679, PIaCe-of-birth.P19, beckum,_germany.Q2707)
UrSula-Lehr	She was a member of&e Christian Democratic Union .	(She, was a member of, The ChnSHan Democratic Union) → (ursula_lehr.Q290708, member-Of-PoliHcaLparty.P102, ChnSHan-democraUc-unionof&rmany.Q49762)
ValdfVia-(Brazilian-Footballer)	ValdlVia Wanderson Ferreira de OliVeira , commonly known as ValdfVia, is a Brazilian footballer who plays as an attackingmidfielder for AVaii, onloan f,om InUrnacional.	^^(A Brazilian Footballer, plays as, An Attacking Midfielder) → (Vald(Via_(braznian_footballer).Q18176477, posi-- UOn-PIayed-OnJeamJ speciality.P413,midfielder.Q193592)
Victor-Franc OiS,-2Nd-DuC-De-BrOmie	His Victory OVer Prince Ferdinand at Bergen won him&e rank of marshal of France from&e RenCh King Louis XV and the title of Prince ofthe Holy Roman Empire "ReichsfuOrst" from Holy Roman Emperor Francis I. In 1759, he won the Battle of Bergen and followed that with the capture the city of Minden, later fighting at the Battle of Minden under the command of Contades, whom he would succeed in command.	(His Victory, won him the, Marshal) → (Victor-francois,_2nd_duc_de_bro^ie.Q695929, award_reCeived.P166, mar- ShalS-OfJfanCe.Q474485)
Figure 11:	Mapped facts: MAMA-GPT-2XL on Wikidata.
22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts BERTLARGE	GPT-2XL	
-Andy-Hilbert	In the same season he was claimed off waivers by the Pittsburgh Penguins on March 9, 2006.	-	(He, by, The Pittsburgh Penguins) → (an⅛-hilbert.Q526158, mem- ber_of_sp'orts_team.P54,pittsburgh_p'enguirs.Q193643)
BOb-DylanQ392	Dylan married his backup singer Carolyn Dennis on June 4, 1986.		^^(Dylan, mamed, Carolyn Dennis) → (BOb-DylanQ392, spouse.P26, Car-- Olyn-Dennis.Q5045345)
BOnes-HilIman	During the hiatus of Midnight Oil , Hillman returned to New Zealand , working as a studio and live musician with Dave Dobbyn and recorded the album ” Available Light”.	(HiUman, returned, New Zealand) → (tonesi.hJlman.Q2910026, coun- try_of_citizenship.P27, new_zeala^.Q664)	
BrenLHinds	Hinds continues to concentrate on Mastodon, with the majority of his time spent touring or in the studio.		^^(His Time,^^with, Mastodon) → (brent-hinds.Q90 9746,^^member_of.P463,- mastodon√band).Q548844)
-BulchVig	Their debut album, ”Garbage”, was an unexpected smash, selling over 4 million copies and certified double platinum in the UK, United States and Australia.	-	^^(Over 4 Mi∏ion Copies, m, United States) → φutchvig.Q451084, coun-- try-Of-CiIizenshiP上27,皿地知3$々30)
C-Kan	In addition to being known as a rapper, C-Kan is also known for supporting the free USe Ofmanjuana In Mexico.		(Marijuana, in, Mexico) → (c-kan.Q27734073, country_of_citizenship.P27, mex- ico.Q96)
-CharlesLGraUoLSr.	Gratiot died of a stroke in St . Louis .	^^(Gratiot, died, St. LCuis) → (Charles_gratioLsr..Q2959257, PlaCejofj⅛ath,P20, st.Jouis.Q38022)	
Cheryl-Chan	Cheryl Chan Cheryl Chan Wei Ling , PBM , is a Singaporean politician .	^^(Cheryl ChanWei Ling,is,ASingaporean PClitiCian) → (CherylJchan.Q22O036O5, ∞cupation.P106, PoliHCian.Q82955)	-
-CybaZAud	Audi is an experienced moderator and presenter at local, regional, and international business events.		^^(Audi,^^is^^Presenter) →^^(Cyba-audi.Q18921358, 8Cupation.P106, televi-- sion_presenter.Q947873)
DOuglas-Lenat	He is a Fellow of the AAAS , AAAI , and Cognitive Science Society , and an editor of the J . Automated Reasoning , J . Learning Sciences , and J . Applied Ontology .	(He, is a Fellow, Aaai) → (douglasdenat.Q559334, memberjof.P463, associa- HonJjOrJhe_advancemenLCf-arHfiCial-intelligence.Q2739680)	-
DOuglas-Lenat	While attending the University of Pennsylvania, Lenat supported himself through programming, notably designing and developing a natural language interface to a U.S. Navy data base question-answenng system servmg as an early onlme ship- board operations manual used on US aircraft carriers.	-	(Lenat, ,, The University of Pennsylvania) → (douglasdenat.Q559334, edu- Cated_at.P69, university.Cf-pennsylvania.Q49117)
-KedSlswarL(FootbaB.Manager)	Despite managing for 39 years he only ever took charge of two clubs, Stockport County and Cardiff City, and he holds the record for longest serving manager in the history of both clubs.	-	(He, charge of, StCCkport County) → (fred_stewart_(fOotball_manager).Q5496345, memberqf-SPOrts-team.P54, stockporLcouny-f.c..Q18526)
-Felix-Tanco	Born Felix Manuel de Jesus Tanco y Bosmeniel, in Bogota, Colombia, he arnved in Cuba at a very young age .	^^(BOgota,~,,~Cuba)^^→^^(felix_tanco.Q5511649,^^COuntry-Of-CiHzenshiP.P27, cuba.Q241)	-
-Gary-AblettJr.	He also won his second Brownlow Medal , becoming the first Gold Coast player to win the award and the 14th player in VFL / AFL history to win it twice .	^^(He, also won, His Second Brownlow Medal) → ι⅛aj^-ablettjr..Q30985O9, awardJeceivedP166, leighmatthews-tτoph<Q6519632); (He, also won, His Sec- ond Brownlow Medal) → (gary_ablett_jr..Q30985O9, awardJeceived.P166,brown- low_medal.Q3853498)	-
Geeto-Mongol	After meeting his would - be tag team partner , Bepo Mongol , Tattrie returned to the WWWF as Geto Mongol and The Mongols were brought to the United States in 1968.	^^(The Mongols, were, The United States) → ι⅛eetC.mongol.Q11324 907, coun- try_of_citizenship.P27, united_states.Q30)	-
Georg-Plekharov	Georgi Plekhanov Georgi Valentinovich Plekhanov was a Russian revolutionary , philosopher and a Marxist theoretician .	(Georgi VaIenHnoviCh Plekhanov, was, A Marxist TheoreHCian) → (geCrgi∙plekhanov.Q1829O5,8CupaHon.P106,PhilosCPher.Q4964182)	-
-Gyozo-CrOzdy	GyOzC Drozdy GyozC Drozdy was a HungananteaCher ,journahst, andpolitician.	^^(Gyozo Drozdy, was, PCbtiCian) → (舒ozC‹drozdy.Q9lOO0l, OCCuPaHon.P106, PoliHCian.Q82955)	
Horaee-Rawlins	Rawlins died on 22 January 1935 in a nursing home in Reading , Berkshire .	(Rawbns, died, Readmg) → i^orace_rawlins.Q4436711, place_of_dealh.P20, read- ing,_berkshire.Q161491)	-
Horaee-Rawlins	He played in a professional event at Stanmore Golf Club in June 1894 but finished well out of the prizes.	-	^^(He, Played ιrn, StanmCre Golf Club) → (horaCeJawlins.Q4436711, sport.P641,- golf.Q5377)
HUgo-WinterhaIter	Winterhalter remained with RCA Victor until 1963, at which time he moved to Kapp; that same year, he also penned the main title theme for the film, ”Diamond Head”.		^^(Wmterhalter, to, Kapp) → ⅛ugo.wmterhalter.Q1635872, recordJabel.P264,- kapp∣jecords.Q1728690)
Ioannis-Talianos	He competed in the men ’ s 4 × 100 metres relay at the 1924 Summer Olympics .	(He, competed in the, The 1924 Summer Olympics) → (ioan- ɑsjaIianCs.Q35692847,partiCipantCf.P1344,1924_summer.Clympics.Q8132)	
Joan-Of-FranCe,-Duchess-Of-Beny	The nuns of the Order of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary still maintain their way of life in monasteries in France, Belgium, Costa Rica and Poland.	-	(Their Way, in, FranCe) → (joanJof-france,JdJchess-of-beπy.Q23 6 220, coun- try Of-CiIizenshiP.P27,france.Q142)
JohnLMaynard-KSynes	John Maynard Keynes John Maynard Keynes , 1st Baron Keynes , was a British economist , whose ideas fundamentally changed the theory and practice of macroe- conomics and the economic policies of governments .	(John Maynard Keynes, was, A British Economist) → (jobn_maynard_keynes.Q9317, occupation.P106, economist.Q188094)	-
Jonathan-CUller	Currently , he is Class of 1916 Professor of English and Comparative Literature at Cornell University .	^^(He,	is	EngUsh)	→	(jonathan_culler.Q933332,	lan- guages spoken. written or signed.P1412, english Ianguage.Q1860)	-
-Jordi.Canias.Perez	In the regional elections of Catalonia in November 2010 , he was chosen in the primary as number three for Ciutadans ’ candidacy in the province of Barcelona .	(The Province, of, Barcelona) → (jordi_Canas-PereZ.Q557 6 93,	mem- ber of political party.P102,citizens (spanishLpObtiCaLparty).Q1393123)	
Jules-DeIi邮	He competed in the freestyle lightweight event at the 1920 Summer Olympics .	^^(He, Competedinthe, The1920Summer Olympics) → (jules.deligny.Q16207961, PartiCiPanLCf.P1344,1920_summer_Clympics.Q8128)	-
UZ_Mcgegor	Liz McGregor Liz McGregor is a South African author and a journalist who worked for leading South African newspapers such as the ” Sunday Times ” and the ” Rand Daily Mail”.	-(LiZ MCgregor, is, A JoumaHst) → (BZ_mcgregor.Q235410 6 9, occupaHon.P106,- PumaIist.Q1930187)	-
Louise-ShnopshiJe	The granddaughter of slaves, Louise Shropshire was born Louise Jarrett on February 15, 1913 in Coffee County, Alabama.		(Louise	Shropshire,	was,	Coffee	County,	Alabama) →	(louise_shj>opshire.Q15430857,	PlaCejoLbirth.P19,	CCf- fee.county,_alabama.Q485660)
-MaciLGurdal	He competed in the men ’ s tournament at the 1952 Summer Olympics .	^^(He,competedinthe,The 1952Summer Olympics) → ιmacit-gurdal.Q573 1 383 5, PartiCiPanLCf.P1344,1952_summer_Clympics.Q8407)	
Markus-FrOU	At the begnn^g of his career , Plroll became a target of some ndicule because his name ” Proll "literally means somethingl⅛e ” lout ”in German.	^^("PB)ll, "in,Gejman) → ιmarkusι.prOΠ.Q704630,country.cf.citizership.P27,ger- many.Q183)	
-MOnde-Hadebe	Their Round Four match against the saw Hadebe score the first senior try of his career in a27 -10 victory , and the Sharks XV again finished top of the Southem Section log.	^^(His Career,^^,,^^The Sharks Xv)^^→^^(monde±adebe.Q6898677,^^mem- ber_of_sports.team.P54, sharks/CunIie±up).Q744636)	-
-Nevine.Southall	He moved on to Everton for £150,000 in 1981 and established himself as the club’s first-choice goalkeeper by the 1983-84 season.	-	(He, moved on to, EvertCn) →	(neville_SOuthall.Q436650,	mem- ber_of_sports_team.P54,evertCn_f.c..Q5794)
Olga-Semenova-Tyan-Shanskaya	She died in Leningrad .	(She, died, Leningrad) →	(olga_semenova_tyan-shansk.aya.Q2392240, place_Cf.death.P20, sajn_Petersibjrg.q656)	
Parvathy-Ratheesh	Parvathy Ratheesh made her film acting debut in 2015 similar to that of her younger brother , Padmaraj Ratheesh who also made his acting debut in the same year through ” Fireman ” .	(Her FUm, that of her younger brother, Padmaraj Ratheesh) → (par- vathyja⅛eesh.Q19895785, sibling,P3373,padmaraj-ratheesh.Q19895782)	-
-Peter_Dana_Riva	In 1993, he was inducted into the Canadian Football Hall of Fame.	-	^^(He,~was_inducted^^intC_the,~~Fame)~→~(PeterjdaIla-riva.Q7173528,- awardJeceivedP166,canadianfOotball-hall offame.Q3517653)
Fierre-Duhem	Unlike many former historians , who denigrated the Middle Ages, he endeavored to show that the Roman Catholic Church had helped foster Western science in one of its most fruitful periods.	-	(The Roman Catholic Church, had, Foster Western Science) → (PienejdJhem.Q314172,field_Cf-work.P101,philosCphy-Of-scien:e.Q59115)
Rafael-ArcadiO-BernaLSupelano	He then served as bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Arauca, Colombia, from 1990 to 2003 and as bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Libano-Honda, Colombia, from 2003 to 2004.	-	(The	Roman	Catholic	Diocese,	,,	Colombia)	→ (rafael_arcadio_bernal_supelano.Q21269Ci4, country _of_citizenship.P27, colom- bia.Q739)
-Rajeshwar _Dayal	The Government of India awarded him the second highest civilian award of the Padma Vibhushan, in 1969.	-	^^(Him,~award,~The^^Padma Vibhushan)^^→^^(rajeshwarJdayal.Q15448539,- awardJeceivedP166,padma-vibhushaπQ672392)
Ray Johnson-(AmriCan-Football)	Ray Johnson Raymond Robert Johnson was an American football defensive back who played three seasons in the National Football League with the Cleveland Rams and Chicago Cardinals .	(The NaUonal FoOtbaIl Sague, back who played, Raymond Robert John- son) → (ray-johnsCn-(americanLf8tbaU).Q21077889, sport.P641, ameri- CanLfootbaU.Q41323)	
Sean-Hanish	Sean Hanish Sean Hanish is an American film writer , producer and director best known for ” Saint Judy ” , ” Return to Zero ” and ” Sister Cities ” .	(Sean Hanish, is, An AmenCan Film Writer) → (Sean-hanish.Q19867622, coun- try_of_citizenship.P27, unitedStates.Q30), (Sean Hanish, is, An AmenCan Film Writer) → (sean_hanish.Q19867622, occupation.P106, screenwnter.Q283 8 9)	
Seth-Plum	Born in Edmonton, Plum played professionally for Charlton Athletic, Chelsea and Southend United.		(Plum, played professionally for, Charlton Athletic) → (seth-Plum.Q7456581, member of_SPOrts-team.P54,charltCrLathleHcf.c..Q19462)
Seth-Plum	Plum received his only cap for England at age 23 while playing for Charlton Athletic , starting and playing the full 90 minutes in a 4 - 1 win over France on 10 May 1923 .	^^(His Only Cap, Playing for, Charlton AlhIetiC) → (Seth-PlumQ7456581, mem- ber_of_sports.team.P54, charltCn_athletic_f.c..Q19462)	-
StanislaV-Nedkov	A two - time national champion in freestyle wrestling , he has also had first - place finishes in international tournaments in Russia , Moldova , Turkey , and Bulgaria .	(Turkey, , and, Bulgaria) →	(stanislav_nedkov.Q4844375,	coun- try_of_citizenship.P27, bulgana.Q219)	-
Stiliyan-Petrov	In addition he is Bulgaria’s all-time most-capped player with 105 appearances for the side.		^^(He, is, Bulgaria'S AH-Time Most-Capped Player) → (sIiliyar_peIrov.Q16 6 263,- country _of_citizenship.P27,bulgaria.Q219)
Stiliyan-Petrov	On 14 January 2010 , it was announced that Petrov had come second in Bulgaria ’ s Player of the Year .	(Petov, in, BUlgana’S Player) → (stibyan_Petnov.Q166263, coun- try Of-CitizenshiP.P27,bulgaπa.Q219)	-
Thomas-A. _Dunn	He graduated from DePaul University College of Law in 1971.	-	^^(He, graduatedfrom, Depaul University College) → (thomasLa.,dunn.Q33082990,- edu?ated_at.P69,depaul_university.college_Cf_law.Q5244034)
Thomas-ScotL(Commentator)	In 1803 , Scott left the Lock Hospital to become Rector of Aston Sandford in Buck- inghamshire where he remained until his death in 1821 .	(His Death,	he rema⅛ed until,	Aston Sandford) → (thomas-scOtL(COmmentatCr).Q7793831,	place_of_dealh.P20,	as- ton_sandfOrd.Q3088O93)	
-Thor.Heyerdahl	Thor Heyerdahl Thor Heyerdahl was a Norwegian adventurer and ethnographer with a background in zoology, botany and geography.		(Thor Heyerdahl, was, A Norwegian Adventurer) → (thor±eyerdahl.Q133622, COUntry-Of-ciHzenship.P27,norway.Q20)
Venkatesh-Kulkarni	His first novel , ” Naked in Deccan ” , won the 1984 American Book Award of the Before Columbus Foundation and was listed among the top ten novels of the decade by the ” Chicago Tribune ” .	(His First Novel, , won, The 1984 AmenCan Book Award) →	(venkatesh.kulkarni.Q792∣0091,	award_received.P166,	ameri- can_book_awards.Q463 60 6)	-
Vitor-Castto-De-Souza	VitOr CastO de SouzaVlor CastO de Souza ,or simply VitOr Cast。, is a BraziUan striker.	-	(VftCr Castrro De Souza, is, A Brazilian Striker) → (vi- tCr_castrro_de_souza.Q56'04 8 7 6,	POsitiorLplayedjonleam√-speciahty.P413, fOrward√assCCiationJOotball).Q280658)
VyaCheslav-Tsaryov	He made his debut in the Soviet Top League in 1990 for FC Dynamo Moscow .	(He, for, Fc Dynamo Moscow) → (vyacheslav-tsaryov.Q4503307, mem- ber_of_sports.team.P54, fc.dynamC_mCscow.Q17497)	-
Zare-Markovski	Zare Markovski as player played in KK RatCtniCki andMZT Skopje.	(ZareMarkovski, playedin, Kk RabotniCki) → (zare_markovski.Q4023S77, mem- ber_of_sports.team.P54, kk_rabotni(!ki.Q2603345)	
Figure 12:	Mapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE vs. MAMA-GPT-2XL on Wikidata.
23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to unmapped facts
-NickRdis	He was also a co - presenter of ” Britain ' s Strongest Man ” on Challenge TV in the United Kingdom .	(Challenge Tv, in, The United Kingdom) → (ChallengeTY in,United_kingdom.Q145)
DOUglas-Bader	At the age Of tWO , Bader jOined his parents in India fOr a year .	(His Parents, in, India) → (doUglas-bader.Q348780, in, india.Q668)
DOUglas-Bader	He remained in France after the war, where , having attained the rank ofmajor , he died in 1922 Ofcomplications Irom those WoUnds in a hospital in Saint - Omer , the same area Where Bader WoUld bail oUt and be captUred in 1941 .	(He, in, France) → (doUglas_bader.Q348780, in, france.Q142)
DOUglas-Bader	On 2 JUly 1941he was awarded thebar to his DSO.	(He, was awarded the bar, his DSO) → (doUglas-bader.Q348780, was awarded the bar, distin- gUished-serVice-Order.Q615838)
Helen-StoiTOW	His father, also named James Jackson Storrow , was a prominent attorney , whose clients inclUded Alexander Graham Bell and the government of VenezUela ; his mother , Ann Maria Perry , was the grandchild of naval hero Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry , and a distant coUsin of President Thomas Jefferson .	(His Father, was, A Prominent Attorney) → (His Father, occUpation.P106, lawyer.Q40348)
Helen-StOrrOW	Helen Storrow Helen Osborne Storrow was a prominent American philanthropist, early Girl ScOUt leader , and chair of the World Committee of the World Association of Girl GUides and Girl ScoUts for eight years .	(Helen Osborne Storrow, was, A Prominent American Philanthropist) → (helenstOrrow.Q5703224, Place-of-birth.P19, United-States.Q30)
JacOb-Van-RUisdael	His cOUsin Jacob was a registered Mennonite in Amsterdam .	(His CoUsin, was, A Registered Mennonite) → (His CoUsin, was, A Registered Mennonite)
JacOb-Van-RUisdael	He appears to have been strongly inflUenced by other contemporary local Haarlem landscapists , most notably Cornelis Vroom and Allaert van Everdingen .	(He, have been strongly inflUenced by, landscape painting) → (jacob_van_rUisdael.Q213612, have been strongly inflU- encedby, landscape_art.Q191163)
LiaquatRLKhan	LiaqUat Ali Khan was edUcated at the Aligarh MUslim University in India , and then at Oxford University in the United Kingdom .	(LiaqUat Ali Khan, in, India) → (liaqUat_ali_khan.Q295713, in, india.Q668)
PaUline-Baynes	Baynes began her edUcation at a convent school.	(HerEdUcation, at, AConvent School) → (PaUline-baynes.Q101951, at, catholic_school.Q1138671)
PaUline-Baynes	Her most vivid recollection of their New Year ' s Eve lUnch at Magdalen College was of his gleefUlly picking nUts OUt of a bowl of BrUssels sproUts .	(Their New Year'S Eve LUnch, at, Magdalen College) → (PaUline-baynes.Q101951,	at, mag- dalenqollege,-Oxford.Q81l62)
PaUline-Baynes	By the time that she left, she had already formed the ambition Ofbecoming an illUstrator.	(She, formed the ambition of becoming, An IllUstrator) → (PaUline_baynes.Q101951, formed the ambition of becom- ing, illUstrator.Q644687)
Thor.Heyerdahl	He was an atheist.	(He,was, An Atheist) → (thor_heyerdahl.Q133 622,was, An Atheist)
-Thor.Heyerdahl	He is bUried in the garden of the family home in Colla Micheri.	-(He, is bUried, CollaMicheri) → (thor_heyerdahl.Q133622, is bUried,colla_micheri.Q3647771)
-Neville-Southall	He moved on to Cheshire CoUnty LeagUe clUb Winsford United at the age of20 .	(He, to, Cheshire CoUnty LeagUe ClUb Winsford United) → (neville_sOUthall.Q43 6 650, to, wins- ford_United_f.c..Q5213266)
Neville-Southall	He later became a player - coach at York City , Rhyl , ShrewsbUry Town and Dagenham & Redbridge .	(He,became,A Player-Coach) → (neville_soUthall.Q436650, O8Upation.P106, APlayer-Coach)
JOhn-Maynard-Keynes	After the war, Winston ChUrchill attempted to check the rise of Keynesian policy - making in the United Kingdom and Used rhetoric critical of the mixed economy in his 1945 election campaign .	(Keynesian Policy-Making, in, The United Kingdom) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, in, United-kingdom.P145)
JOhn-Maynard-Keynes	Apart from Great Britain , Keynes ' s attention was primarily f∞Used on the United States.	(Keynes'S Attention, was, The United States) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q93r7, was, United-States.Q30)
JOhn-Maynard-Keynes	John Maynard Keynes John Maynard Keynes, 1st Baron Keynes, was a British economist, whose ideas fUndamentally changed the theory and practice of macroeconomics and the economic policies of governments .	(JohnMaynard Keynes, was, A British Economist) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q93r7, was, United-kingdom.P145)
Ernst-Haeckel	Ernst Haeckel Ernst Heinrich Philipp AIgUst Haeckel was a German zoologist, natUralist , philosopher , physician , professor , marine biologist , and artist who discovered , described and named thoUsands of new species , mapped a genealogical tree relating all life forms , and coined many terms in biology , inclUding ” ecology ” , ” phylUm ” , ” phylogeny ” , and ” Protista . ”	(AUgUst Haeckel, was, A German Zoologist) → (ernst_haeckel.Q48246, was, germany.Q183)
Ernst-Haeckel	Haeckel was awarded the title of Excellency by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1907 and the Linnean Society of London ' s prestigioUs Darwin - Wallace Medal in 1908 .	(Haeckel, was awarded the, Excellency) → (ernst_haeckel.Q48246, award_received.P166, Excellency)
Ernst-Haeckel	He was also a pacifist Until the First World War , when he wrote propaganda in favor of the war .	(He,was, APacifist) → (ernsLhaeckel.Q48246, was,A Pacifist)
Figure 13:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE on Wikidata.
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to unmapped facts
DoUglas-Bader	He left St Edward's in early 1928, aged 18.	(He, left, St Edward) → (doUglas_bader.Q348780, left, st_edward's-school,-oxford.Q128260)
DoUglas-Bader	GroUp Captain Sir DoUglas Robert SteUart Bader, was a Royal Air Force flying ace dUring the Second World War.	(DoUglas Bader GroUp Captain Sir DoUglas Robert SteUart Bader, was, A Royal Air Force Flying Ace) → (doU- glas-bader.Q348780, was, flying_ace.Q222982)
DoUglas-Bader	On 2 JUly 1941he was awarded thebarto his DSO.	(He, was awarded the bar to, his DSO) → (doUglas-bader.Q348780, was awarded the bar to, distin- gUished-SerVice-Order.Q615838)
Helen-Storrow	His father, also named James Jackson Storrow, was a prominent attorney, whose clients inclUded Alexander Graham Bell and the government of VenezUela; his mother, Ann Maria Perry, was the grandchild of naval hero Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry, and a distant coUsin of President Thomas Jefferson.	(His Father, was, A Prominent Attorney) → (His Father, occUpation.P106, lawyer.Q40348)
Helen-Storrow	Helen Osborne Storrow was a prominent American philanthropist, early Girl ScOUt leader, and chair of the World Committee of the World Association of Girl GUides and Girl ScoUts for eight years.	(Helen Osborne Storrow, was, A Prominent American Philanthropist) → (helen.storrow.Q5703224, was, United-States.Q30)
Jacob-Van-RUisdael	RUisdael lived and worked in Amsterdam for the rest ofhis life.	(RUisdael, lived, Amsterdam) → GacOb-Van-rUisdael.Q213612, lived, amsterdam.Q727); (RUisdael, lived and worked in, Amsterdam) → GacOb-Van-rUisdael.Q213612, lived and worked in, amsterdam.Q727)
LiaqUatRLKhan	LiaqUat Ali Khan was edUcated at the Aligarh MUslim University in India, and then at Oxford University in the United Kingdom.	(LiaqUat Ali Khan, was edUcated at, The Aligalh MUslim University) → (liaqUat_ali_khan.Q295713, was edUcated at, aligar∙h-mUslimjιniversity.Q19δ544)
LiaqUatRLKhan	After the death of his father in 1919, Ali Khan, with British Government awarding the grants and scholarship, went to England, attending Oxford University's Exeter College to pUrsUe his higher edUcation.	(His Higher EdUcation, PursUe, Oxford University'S Exeter College) → (IiaqUat_ali_khan.Q295713, PursUe, Univer- sity-of-oxford.Q34433)
LiaqUatRLKhan	In 1940, Khan was made the depUty leader of the MUslim LeagUe Parliamentary party.	(Khan, was made the depUty leader of, The MUslim LeagUe Parliamentary Party) → (liaqUat_ali_khan.Q295713, depUty leader, all-india_mUslim_leagUe.Q223898)
PaUline-Baynes	When Baynes's father retired, he left India and etUrned to England, settling with Baynes's mother in a hoUse close to Baynes's own near Farnham in soUthwest SUrrey.	-(He, left, India) → (paUline_baynes.Q101951, left, india.Q668)
PaUline-Baynes	Baynes began her edUcation at a convent school.	(HerEdUcation, at, AConvent School) → (PaUline-baynes.Q101951, at, catholic_school.Q1138671)
PaUline-Baynes	Her most vivid recollection of their New Year's Eve lUnch at Magdalen College was of his gleefUlly picking nUts oUt of a bowl of BrUssels sproUts.	(Their New Year'S Eve LUnch, at, Magdalen College) → (PaUline-baynes.Q101951,	at, mag- dalenqollege,-oxford.Q81162)
PaUline-Baynes	She was not a diligent stUdent, frittering away her time on coffee and parties, and she left the Slade withoUt a qUalifica- tion, BUt she did achieve the distinction, one shared with her sister, of exhibiting at the Royal Academy of Arts in 1939. In 1940, a year into World War II, both Baynes sisters joined the Women's VolUntary Service.	(She, withoUt a qUalification, The Slade) → (PaUline-baynes.Q101951, withoUt a qUalification, slade_school_of_fine_art.Q1399299)
Thor.Heyerdahl	His theories rarely won any scientific acceptance, whereas Heyerdahl himself rejected all scientific criticism and con- centrated on pUblishing his theories in popUlar books aimed at the general pUblic.	(His Theories, at, The General PUblic) → (thor_heyerdahl.Q133 622, at, generaLpUblic)
Thor.Heyerdahl	He was an atheist.	(He,was, An Atheist) → (thor_heyerdahl.Q133S22,was, An Atheist)
-Neville-SoUthall	As a teenager, SoUthall had UnsUMessfUltrials at Wrexham, Crewe Alexandra and Bolton Wanderers.	(SoUthall, at, Wrexham) → (neville_sOUthall.Q436650, at, Wrexham-a.f.c..Q18529); (SoUthall, at, Crewe Alexandra) → (neville-sOUthall.Q436650, at, crewe_alexandra_f.c..Q19587)
John-Maynard-Keynes	JohnMaynard Keynes, 1stBaron Keynes, was a British economist, whose ideas fUndamentally changed the theory and practice of macroeconomics and the economic policies of governments.	(JohnMaynard Keynes, was, A British Economist) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, was, United-kingdom.Q145)
John-Maynard-Keynes	In JanUary 1889 at the age of five and a half, Keynes started at the kindergarten of the Perse School for Girls for five mornings a week.	(Keynes, at, The Perse School) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, at,the_perse_school.Q7756751)
John-Maynard-Keynes	In JanUary 1892, at eight and a half, he started as a day PUPil at St Faith's preparatory school.	(He, at, St Faith'S Preparatory School) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, at, st_faith's_school.Q75 93056)
John-Maynard-Keynes	Keynes was a lifelongmember ofthe Liberal Party, which Until the 1920s had been one ofthe two mainpolitical parties in the United Kingdom, and as late as 1916 had often been the dominant power in government.	(Keynes, was a lifelong member of, The liberal party) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, was a lifelong member of, liberal_party_(Uk).Q622441)
Ernst-Haeckel	Haeckel was awarded the title of Excellency by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1907 and the Linnean Society of London's prestigioUs Darwin-Wallace Medal in 1908.	(Haeckel, was awarded the, Excellency) → (ernst_haeckel.Q48246, award_received.P166, Excellency)
Ernst-Haeckel	He was also a pacifist Until the First World War, when he wrote propaganda in favor of the war.	(He,was, APacifist) → (ernsLhaeckel.Q48246, was,A Pacifist)
Ernst-Haeckel	He was also a social Darwinist who believed that ”sUrvival of the fittest” was a natUral law, and that strUggle led to improvement of the race.	(He, was, ASocial Darwinist) → (emst-haeckel.Q48246, was, A Social Darwinist)
Ernst-Haeckel	Ernst Haeckel was born on 16 FebrUary 1834, in Potsdam.	(Haeckel, was born on 17 FebrUary 1834, in, Potsdam) → (ernst_haeckel.Q48246, was born on 17 FebrUary 1834, in, potsdam.Q1711)
Figure 14:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-GPT-2XL on Wikidata.
24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
			
ID	Sentence	Candidate facts to mapped facts BERTLARGE	GPT-2χL		
NickSldis	He waS aLSo a co - preSenter of ” Britain ’ S StrongeSt Man ” on ChaLLenge TV in the United Kingdom .	(Challenge Tv, in, The United Kingdom) → (Challenge TV, in, United_kingdom.Q145)	
DouglaS-Bader	GroUp Captain Sir DoUgLaS Robert SteUart Bader, waS a RoyaL Air Force flying ace dUring the Second WorLd War.		(Douglas Bader Group Captain Sir Douglas Robert Steuart Bader, was, A Royal Air Force Flying Ace) → (dougIas_bader.Q348780, was, flying_ace.Q222982)
DouglaS-Bader	At the age of two , Bader joined hiS parentS in India for a year .	(His Parents, in, India) → (dougIas_bader.Q348780, in, india,Q668)	
DouglaS-Bader	On 2 JULy 1941 he waS awarded the bar to hiS DSO.	(He, was awarded the bar, his DSO)→ (dougIas_bader.Q348780, was awarded the bar, distinguished_service_order.Q615838)	(He, was awarded the bar to, his DSO)→ (dougIas_bader.Q348780, was awarded the bar to, distinguished_service_order.Q615838)
Helen-Storrow	HiS father , aLSo named JameS JackSon Storrow , waS a prominent attorney , whoSe cLientS incLUded ALexander Graham BeLL and the government of VenezUeLa ; hiS mother , Ann Maria Perry , waS the grandchiLd of navaL hero Commodore OLiver Hazard Perry , and a diStant coUSin of PreSident ThomaS JefferSon .	(His Father, was, A Prominent Attorney) → (His Father, occupation.P106, Iawyer.Q40348)	(His Father, was, A Prominent Attorney) → (His Father, occupation.P106, Iawyer.Q40348)
Helen-Storrow	HeLen OSborne Storrow waS a prominent American phiLanthropiSt, earLy GirL ScoUt Leader, and chair of the WorLd Committee of the WorLd ASSociation of GirL GUideS and GirL ScoUtS for eight yearS.	(Helen Osborne Storrow, was, A Prominent American Philanthropist) → (he- Ien_storrow.Q5703224, was, UnitedftateS.Q30)	(HeIen Osborne Storrow, was, A Prominent American PhiIanthropist) → (he- Ien_storrow.Q5703224, was, united _states.Q30)
JaCOb-Van-RUiSdaeI	RUiSdaeL Lived and worked in AmSterdam for the reSt of hiS Life.	-	(Ruisdael, lived, Amsterdam) → (jacob_van_ruisdaeI.Q213612, lived, am- sterdam.Q727); (RuisdaeI, Iived and worked in, Amsterdam) → (ja- cob_van_ruisdaeI.Q213612, lived and worked in, amsterdam.Q727)
Jacob-Van-RUiSdaeI	HiS coUSin Jacob waS a regiStered Mennonite in AmSterdam .	(His Cousin, was, A Registered Mennonite) → (His Cousin, was, A Registered Mennonite)	
Jacob-Van-RUiSdaeI	He appearS to have been StrongLy inflUenced by other contemporary LocaL HaarLem LandScapiStS , moSt notabLy CorneLiS Vroom and ALLaert van Everdingen .	(He, have been strongly influenced by, landscape painting) → (ja- cob_van_ruisdaeI.Q213612, have been strongly influenced by, Iand- ScaPe^rt.Q191163)		
L ι.qu.∣ Ali K.h.n	LiaqUat ALi Khan waS edUcated at the ALigarh MUSLim UniverSity in India, and then at Oxford UniverSity in the United Kingdom.	(Liaquat Ali Khan, in, India) → (Liaquat_aIi_khan.Q295713, in, india.Q668)	(Liaquat AIi Khan, was educated at, The AIigarh MusIim University) → (Ii- aquat_aIi_khan.Q295713, was educated at, aligarh_muslim_university.Q196544)
Liaquat-Ali-Khan	After the death of hiS father in 1919, ALi Khan, with BritiSh Government awarding the grantS and SchoLarShip, went to EngLand, attending Oxford UniverSity’S Exeter CoLLege to pUrSUe hiS higher edUcation.		(His Higher Education, pursue, Oxford University’S Exeter CoIIege) → (Ii- aquat-aIi-khan.Q295713, pursue, UniverSity-of-oxford.Q34433)
L Iiquil Ali Kh，n	In 1940, Khan waS made the depUty Leader of the MUSLim LeagUe ParLiamentary party.		(Khan, was made the deputy Ieader of, The MusIim League ParIiamentary Party) → (Iiaquat_aIi_khan.Q295713, deputy leader, aIL-india_muslim_league.Q223898)
PaULine-BayneS	When BayneS’S father retired, he Left India and retUrned to EngLand, SettLing with BayneS’S mother in a hoUSe cLoSe to BayneS’S own near Farnham in SoUthweSt SUr- rey.		(He, left, India) → (pauline_baynes.Q101951, left, india.Q668)
PaULine-BayneS	BayneS began her edUcation at a convent SchooL.	(Her Education, at, A Convent School) → (PaULine_baynes.Q101951, at, catholic _schooI.Q1138671)	-(Her Education, at, A Convent School) → (pauline_baynes.Q101951, at,- CathOLiC_schooI.Q1138671)
PaULine-BayneS	Her moSt vivid recoLLection of their New Year’S Eve LUnch at MagdaLen CoLLege waS of hiS gLeefULLy picking nUtS oUt of a bowL of BrUSSeLS SproUtS.	(Their New Year,S Eve Lunch, at, Magdalen College) → (PaULine-baynes.Q101951, at, magdaIen_colLege,_oxford.Q81162)	(Their New Year’S Eve Lunch, at, MagdaIen CoIIege) → (PaULine-baynes.Q101951, at, magdaIen_colLege,_oxford.Q81162)
PaULine-BayneS	She was not a diligent student, frittering away her time on coffee and parties-,- and She Left the SLade withoUt a qUaLification, BUt She did achieve the diStinction, one Shared with her SiSter, of exhibiting at the Royal Academy of ArtS in 1939, In 1940, a year into World War II, both BayneS SiSterS joined the Women’S VolUntary Service.		(She, without a qualification, The Slade) → (PaULine-baynes.Q101951, without a qualification, sIade_schooI_of_fine_art.Q1399299)
PaULine-BayneS	By the time that She left , She had already formed the ambition of becoming an illUStrator .	■ h		 I th 			 b 		 A，	Ill		 (PaULine-baynes.Q101951, formed the ambition of becoming, ilLustrator.Q644687)	
Thor-Heyerdahl	HiS theorieS rarely won any Scientific acceptance, whereaS Heyerdahl himSelf re- jected all Scientific criticiSm and concentrated on pUbliShing hiS theorieS in popUlar bookS aimed at the general pUblic.		(His Theories, at, The General Public) → (thor-heyerdahI.Q133622, at, gen- eral_public)
ThorJHeyerdahL	He waS an atheiSt .	(He, was, An Atheist) → (thor_heyerdahI.Q133622, was, An Atheist)	(He, was, An Atheist) → (thor_heyerdahI.Q133622, was, An Atheist)
-ThorJHeyerdahL	He iS bUried in the garden of the family home in Colla Micheri .	(He, is buried, COna MiCheri) → (thorJleyerdahI.Q133622, is buried, COna-micheri.Q3647771)	
Nevi∏e-Southa∏	AS a teenager, SoUthall had UnSUcceSSfUl trialS at Wrexham, Crewe Alexandra and Bolton WandererS.		-(SouthaIL,	at,	WreXham) →	(neviIe-SOUthan.Q436650,	at,- WreXhama.f.c..Q18529);	(SouthaIL, at, Crewe Alexandra) → (nevilLef OUthan.Q436650, at, crewe_aLexandra_f.c..Q19587)
NevineJSOUthan	He moved on to CheShire CoUnty LeagUe clUb WinSford United at the age of 20 .	(He, to, Cheshire County League Club Winsford United) → (nevilLe-SOUthan.Q436650,to, WinSfOrd_united_f.c..Q5213266)		
NevineJSOUthan	He later became a player - coach at York City , Rhyl , ShrewSbUry Town and Da- genham & Redbridge .	-(He, became, A Player-Coach) → (nevilLe_southaIL.Q436650, occupation.P106, A Player-Coach)	
John-Maynard-KeyneS	In JanUary 1889 at the age of five and a half, KeyneS Started at the kindergarten of the PerSe School for GirlS for five morningS a week.		(Keynes, at, The Perse School) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, at, the_perSe-SchooI.Q7756751)
John _Maynard-KeyneS	In JanUary 1892, at eight and a half, he Started aS a day pUpil at St Faith’S preparatory School.		(He, at, St Faith,S Preparatory School) → (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, at, Stfaith's-schooI.Q7593θ56)
John _Maynard-KeyneS	After the war , WinSton ChUrchill attempted to check the riSe of KeyneSian policy - making in the United Kingdom and USed rhetoric critical of the mixed economy in hiS 1945 election campaign .	∙K. y	 I	Ii y' I.Ii”.	in	Ih		 I K,∣h.∣ m- (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317, in, United_kingdom.P145)	
John-Maynard-KeyneS	KeyneS waS a lifelong member of the Liberal Party, which Until the 1920S had been one of the two main political partieS in the United Kingdom, and aS late aS 1916 had often been the dominant power in government.		(Keynes, was a IifeIong	member	of, The	IiberaI	party)	→ (john_maynard_keynes.Q9317,	was a	Lifelong	member of,	lib- eraLparty.(uk).Q622441)	
ErnSt-HaeckeI	ErnSt Haeckel ErnSt Heinrich Philipp AUgUSt Haeckel waS a German zoologiSt , natUraliSt , philoSopher , phySician , profeSSor , marine biologiSt , and artiSt who diScovered , deScribed and named thoUSandS of new SpecieS , mapped a genealogical tree relating all life formS , and coined many termS in biology , inclUding ” ecology ” , ” phylUm ” , ” phylogeny ” , and ” ProtiSta . ”	(August Haeckel, was, A German Zoologist) → (ernst_haeckeI.Q48246, was, ger- many.Q183)	
ErnSt-HaeckeI	ErnSt Haeckel waS born on 16 FebrUary 1834, in PotSdam.		(Haeckel, was born on 17 February 1834, in, Potsdam) → (ernst_haeckeI.Q48246, was born on 17 February 1834, in, potsdam.Q1711)
ErnSt-HaeckeI	Haeckel waS awarded the title of Excellency by KaiSer Wilhelm II in 1907 and the Linnean Society of London’S preStigioUS Darwin-Wallace Medal in 1908.	-(Haeckel,	was_awarded_the,	Excellency)~→~(ernst_haeckeI.Q48246,- award-received.P166, Excellency)	-(Haeckel,	WaS_awarded_the,	Excellency)~→~(ernst_haeckeI.Q48246,- award-reCeived.P166, Excellency)
ErnSt-HaeckeI	He waS alSo a pacifiSt Until the FirSt World War, when he wrote propaganda in favor of the war.	(He, was, A Pacifist) → (ernst_haeckeI.Q48246, was, A Pacifist)	(He, was, A Pacifist) → (ernst_haeckeI.Q48246, was, A Pacifist)
Figure 15:	Unmapped facts: MAMA-BERTLARGE vs. MAMA-GPT-2XL on Wikidata.
fbm-Petty-andJhe-HeartbreMker⅞lQ2117272
Rock_
φ	NaShylI^23197
songwriter.Q753110
pel.Q5967604
Columbia Re
Γhomas Me
geπreτP13fr-
MinneaPoIiS.Q36091
Grammy_Award_for_Best_Solo_Rock_Vocal_Performance.Q1542199
Artists_United_Against A^aliheid.Q12697
AmeriCanjP仁MUSiC.Q1541229
United_States_of_America.Q30
Figure 16:	A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA using BERTLARGE from Wikipedia
pages neighboring "Bob_Dylan”. The blue node and arrow represent the mapped facts in the Wikidata schema,
while the yellow node and arrow denote the unmapped facts in the open schema. We also visualize the correct
facts that are new in Wikidata in yellow.
25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 17: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Douglas_Bader”.
Figure 18: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Helen_Ston`ow”.
Figure 19: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Jacob _Van_RuiSdael”.
26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 20: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“John_Maynard_Keynes”.
Figure 21: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Liaquat_Ali_Khan”.
Southend_
Figure 22: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Neville_SoUthall”.
Stoke_City_F.C..Q18736
Ybrk_City_F.C..Q48954
27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 23: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Pauline_Baynes”.
Figure 24: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-BERTLARGE from the Wikipedia page
“Thor_Heyerdahl’.
Figure 25: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Douglas_Bader”.
28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 26: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Helen_Storrow”.
Figure 27: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Jacob _van_Ruisdael”.
Figure 28: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“John_Maynard-Keynes”.
29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 29: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Liaquat_AlLKhan”.
Figure 30: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Neville.Southall”.
Figure 31: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Pauline-Baynes”.
GeneraLPublic
Figure 32: A snapshot subgraph of the open KG generated by MAMA-GPT-2XL from the Wikipedia page
“Thor_Heyerdahl”.
30
Language Models are
Open Knowledge Graphs
Supplementary Materials
Problem
•	Knowledge graph construction requires human supervision
•	Language models store knowledge
WikipediA
The Free Encyclopedia
Common
Crawl
Smashwords
your eb∞k. your way.
×	© Login
WikipediA
The Free Encyclopedia
Article Talk	Read View source View history [ SearCh WikiPedia Qj
Bread	自
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
For other uses, see Bread (disambiguation).
Bread is a staple food prepared	Bread
from a dough of flour and water,
usually by baking. Throughout
recorded history it has been a
2
Problem
• How to use language models to construct knowledge graphs?
ab	Google B RT 看	台	三 等一豆1一❷就享蚪		/	o °	∙	∙ Freebase	M	Ge。NameS :	∙ ConceptNet，	. ∖	V∙ ɪ	■	Ni ・。・ KNOWLEDGE . GRAPH	ʊ C DBpedia —X H	」	∖ Prospera •筝	・•・・■・ ∖ Metaweb D 3

Challenges
Language
model
Target
corpus
Knowledge
graph

General
knowledge
Domain specific
knowledge
Structured
representation
4
Proposed Approach
Corpus Dylan is a songwriter. Dylan was awarded Nobel Prize. Dylan signed Albert Grossman. …	d				
				Open Knowledge Graph ■ BobJJ%g392 %Albert Grossman.Q708584 Songwriter.Q753110	Nobel_Prize.Q7191
	Match	Candidate Facts (Dylan, is, songwriter) (Dylan, aw a rd e , Nobel Prize) (Dylan, signed, Albert Grossman)	Map —►	
Pre-trained language model				
I BERT I I GPT-2 I ∙∙∙				
• MAMA constructs an open knowledge graph with a single forward pass of
the language model (without fine-tuning) over the corpus
•	Match: generates a set of candidate facts from a textual corpus
•	Map: produces an open knowledge graph from the matched candidates
5
Results on TAC KBP
■ MAMA-GPT2
■ MAMA-GPT2medium ■ MAMA-GPT2large ■ MAMA-GPT2xl
6
Results on TAC KBP
■ Stanford OpenIE ■ MAMA-BERTbase ■ MAMA-BERTIarge
■ OpenIE 5.1
■ MAMA-GPT2
■ MAMA-GPT2medium ■ MAMA-GPT2large ■ MAMA-GPT2xl
7
Results on TAC KBP
8
Results on Wikidata
16.77
22.39
■ Stanford OpenIE ■ MAMA-BERTIarge ■ MAMA-GPT2xl
MAMA outperforms the previous
best system by over 5.6%
MAMA is scalable to larger corpora
χ-1
Larger corpora embed more
COmPlete KGS
9
An Open KG Example
Rock_music.Q
36	.
the_Band .Q600344
tour∖with
Artists_United_Against_Apartheid.Q12697
Tom_Petty_and_the_Heartbreakers.Q2117272
Harmonica.Q51290
Duluth.Q485708
Nashville.Q23197
songwri g r.Q753110
Urban_contemporary__gospel.Q59^7604
genι¾vP136
the Grateful Dead.Q212533
Folk_music.Q2358
occupation. P106
genre.P136
member_of,P463
tour_with
___Lnstrum entτP13O
Polar_Music_Prize.Q754841
re^denee7fs551 tour_with
Columbia_Recokls.Q183387
% nmc Kennedy C
occupation, P106	j-
residence.P551
u n ma ri:ifid-sa rtπ⅞r. P451
spouse.P26
award rec
Sara_Lownds.Q457433
New_York_City.Q60
genre.P136
Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance.Q1542199
Bob
Contains knowledge in existing KGs
(in blue)
ter Honors.414306
a wardrreεe ived..£l_66_
country_oCcitizenship.P27
).P937
residence.P551
Proper_Rec0rds.Q725O169
SingQpSbngWriter.Q488205
Occupaf n.P106
American Folk Music.Q1541229
genre.P136^
Grammy_Lifetime_Achievement_Award.Q935943
country _of_qitizenship.P27
award r
U nited_States_of_America .Q30
Minneapolis.Q36091 ∣
Thomas Mert
Award.Q337620
ived.P166
Features new knowledge not in
existing KGS ( n yellow)
10
An Open Question
• Assumption: Language models and knowledge graphs just encode the
same world knowledge in two different formats, thus the two formats
should be equal. But,
Is the assumption TRUE?
Language Models = Knowledge Graphs
11
Contributions
•	Problem: How to construct knowledge graphs from pre-trained
language models.
•	Approach: An unsupervised two-stage approach that constructs
knowledge graphs with a single forward pass of the pre-trained
language models without fine-tuning over the textual corpora
(outperforming compared methods by over 5.6% in Fl on Wikidata).
•	Result: Open knowledge graphs not only cover the knowledge already
in existing knowledge graphs (e.g., Wikidata), but also features open
factual knowledge that is new.
12