Table 1: Each roW shoWs one attack method. The first column is each method’s success rate, Which is defined as,the number of attacked images that labels change from being correct to incorrect divided by the number of correctlyclassified images. Remaining columns represent the distance functions to measure the difference betWeen attackedimages and original images. We embolden the smallest values in each column. Our method With a = 0 has thesmallest human perceptual distances, despite larger Lp distances than PGD.
Table 2: Comparing differences in human saliency maps for all methods. The first column is the attack’s successrate (same values as Table 1) and rest columns are the distances between attacked images’ saliency maps and originalimages’ saliency maps. We embolden the smallest distance value. Our method with a = 0 generates attack imageswith the smallest distances in human saliency map, which means they induce the smallest changes in human saliency.
Table 3: Comparing results with different λ. Our method with λ = 1 balances the two goals of attacking the imagesand minimizing the perceptual distances the best, because it has the smallest computation cost. Our method with λ = 2minimizes DISTS distance better than with λ = 1.
Table 4: Comparing results with different step size. Our method with = 0.05 has the smallest distance values in alldistance measures but requires the most time to attack all the images.
Table 5: Implementation details in Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3ImageNetLearning rate α	0.1Optimizer	SGDMomentum	5e-4T1,T2	3	0.1`	Cross entropyλ	1In Algorithm 1, in each step, our algorithm requires the gradient of PieAPP model with respect to images and com-puting the gradient is expensive. First, we sped up our algorithm by adding a early-stop mechanism, which means wewill stop adding perturbation if the attack is successful. Second, we reuse the gradient of PieAPP model with respectto images ∂c°(xadv, x)∕∂Xadv every 5 steps. Leveraging these two techniques, our method is comparably fast withPerC_AL, see Table 6. NPTM (PPGD) and NPTM (LPA) are both faster than our method, but they both do not reach100% success rate and are much more perceptible in both distance measures we use.
Table 6: Total time to attack 1000 images.
