Table 1: Per-game evaluations on Jiminy Cricket. For CALM and CMPS, metrics are averagedover the last 50 episodes of training. While our environments are challenging, agents make non-zero progress in most games. Morality conditioning with CMPS improves moral behavior withoutreducing task performance.
Table 2: Our CMPS morality conditioning method reduces Relative Immorality (Immorality /Percent Completion) by 37% compared to the state-of-the-art CALM agent. Additionally, we do notreduce task performance, indicating that morality conditioning can be an effective tool for reducingsuperfluous immoral behavior.
Table 3: Analyzing the performance of various shaping techniques and sources of moral knowledgeto construct different artificial consciences. Compared to CMPS, soft policy shaping (Soft Shaping)introduces noise and reduces performance. A utility-based morality prior (Utility Shaping), is notas effective at reducing immoral actions. Reward Shaping is slightly better than utility, but not aseffective as our proposed method.
Table 4: Additional per-game evaluations on Jiminy Cricket. For all methods but Human Expertand Random Agent, metrics are averaged over the last 50 episodes of training. For Random Agent,metrics are averaged over 50 episodes of evaluation in same setup used for training CALM. Note thatwhile Immorality is higher for Human Expert than for other methods, Relative Immorality is muchlower (see Table 2).
Table 5: Additional per-game evaluations on Jiminy Cricket. For all methods, metrics are averagedover the last 50 episodes of training.
Table 6: Results at each starting percentage. Each value averages the performance of 25 trainedagents—one for each Jiminy Cricket environment. Our fast-forwarding methodology substantiallyincreases the diversity of scenarios that agents are evaluated on, resulting in a more informativecomparison than only evaluating agents in the early stages of games. Interestingly, we find thatagents achieve similar fractions of the remaining reward at each starting percentage, which indicatesthat obtaining a fixed amount of reward is harder in later stages of the game, where more complexmanipulations of accumulated items may be required. Entries marked N/A do not attain a positiveaverage Percent Completion and so cannot be compared on the Relative Immorality Metric. Forall starting percentages, CMPS has lower Immorality than CALM, indicating that our approach forsteering agents towards moral behavior works in diverse scenarios throughout the Jiminy Cricketgames.
Table 7: Efficiency of the original CALMagent and our modified CALM agent with acustom transformers library that removes re-dundant computation. To condition agentsto behave morally in CMPS, large languagemodels are run in tandem with the under-lying agent, which is made possible by thelarge memory savings that we obtain.
