Table 1: Theoretical error rates of various aggregation algorithms. Error rate is the L2 distance between theoutputs of robust aggregation algorithms in benign setting (all benign clients) and under attack (some clientsmalicious). n is the number of clients, is the breaking point, d is the dimensionality of aggregation algorithms’input, and σ2 is the variance of each of the dimensions.
Table 2: Experimental setup: The number of malicious clients used for robustness assessment of differentAGRs based on their breaking points. The number of benign parties are shown on top of each column.
Table 3: Comparison of the robustness of Cronus and of the parameter sharing based FL with various AGRs.
Table 4: Sample complexity, Θ((d/) log d), of Cronus aggregation, using (Diakonikolas et al., 2017), forparameters and predictions updates. For parameters, d is size of model; for predictions, d is the number ofclasses in the classification task. The ratio shows that Cronus learning can achieve the same error guarantee as infederated learning, but with a network which is 5 orders of magnitude smaller, for benchmark ML tasks.
Table 5: Evaluation of the conventional federated learning with various aggregation schemes with Cronuslearning using the strong poisoning attacks described in Section 5. Robustness in Table 3 is measured as theratio of the accuracy of the final model/s when the strongest attack is mounted and the accuracy in the benignsetting; the strongest attack is determined empirically as the one that maximally reduces the accuracy of thecorresponding federated learning aggregation.
Table 6: Accuracy of passive and active membership inference attacks with central server as adversary. We alsoevaluate effect of adversarial regularization (with parameter λ) used to preserve membership privacy. We use 4parties and data per party as in Table ??.
Table 7: Accuracy and robustness of models for record level DP (Abadi et al., 2016) with = 15.4 on the SVHNdataset. The baseline stand-alone accuracy is 87%.
Table 8: Comparison between heterogeneous and homogeneous collaborations in Cronus.
Table 9: Effect of the presence of low accuracy bad models on the performance of higher accuracy good models.
Table 10: More participation due to heterogeneity always improves the overall utility of the collaboration.
