Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Reinforcement Learning with Efficient
Active Feature Acquisition
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Solving real-life sequential decision making problems under partial observability
involves an exploration-exploitation problem. To be successful, an agent needs
to efficiently gather valuable information about the state of the world for making
rewarding decisions. However, in real world applications, acquiring valuable infor-
mation is often highly costly, e.g., in the medical domain, information acquisition
might correspond to performing a medical test on a patient. This poses a significant
challenge for the agent to learn optimal policy for the task. In this paper, we propose
a model-based reinforcement learning framework that learns a policy which solves
this exploration-exploitation problem during its execution. Key to the success is a
novel sequential variational autoencoder that learns high-quality representations
from partially observed states, which are then used by the policy to maximize the
task reward in a cost-efficient manner. We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed
framework in a control domain as well as using a medical simulator. In both tasks,
our proposed method outperforms conventional baselines and results in policies
with greater cost efficiency.
1	Introduction
Recently, machine learning models for automated sequential decision making have shown remarkable
success across many application areas, such as visual recognition (Mathe et al., 2016; Das et al.,
2017), robotics control (Finn et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018), medical diagnosis (Ling et al., 2017;
Peng et al., 2018) and computer games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). One fundamental
reason that drives the success of such models and enables them to outperform classical algorithms is
the availability of large amounts of training data. Typically such training data is either fully observed
or the features stem from an action-independent observation model (which clearly can depend on the
state of the system). However, the fundamental assumption that the same features are always readily
available during deployment could not hold in many real-world applications. For instance, consider a
medical support system for monitoring and treating patients during their stay at hospital which was
trained on rich historical medical data. To provide the best possible treatment, the system might need
to perform several measurements of the patient over time, while some of them could be costly or
even pose a health risk. Therefore, during deployment, it is more ideal that the system could function
with minimal features while during training more features might have been available. In such cases,
we are interested in decision making models that actively take the measurement process, i.e., feature
acquisition, into account and only acquire the information relevant for making a decision.
In this paper, we consider the challenging problem of learning effective policies when the cost
of information acquisition cannot be neglected. To be successful,we need to learn policies which
acquires the information required for solving a task in the cheapest way possible. For simplicity, we
can think of the policy as being constituted of an acquisition policy which actively selects meaningful
features to be observed and a task policy, which selects actions to change the state of the system
towards some goal.1 As such, we consider a partially observable learning problem with the following
two distinguishing properties compared to the most commonly studied problems (see also Figure 3.2
for an illustration). (i) By incorporating active feature acquisition, the training of the task policy
is based upon subsets of features only, i.e., there are missing features, where the missingness is
1Clearly, these two policies are not independent in general, e.g., acquiring features can change the state of
the system.
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
conventional POMDP
(e.g. navigation)
RL + feature acquisition
(e.g. medical treatments)
action
acquire
Figure 1: An illustrative figure for com-
paring POMDPs considered in conventional
RL literature and those in our proposed set-
ting. By performing active feature acquisi-
tion, the partial observability is determined
by the feature acquisition policy besides the
evolvement of the system.
controlled by the acquisition policy. Thus, the resulting POMDP is different from the conventional
POMDPs in RL literature (Cassandra, 1998) where the partial observability for later stems from a
fixed and action-independent observation model. Also, the state transitions in conventional POMDPs
are only determined by the choice of the task action, whereas in our setting the state-transition is
affected by both the task action and the feature acquisition choice. (ii) The learning of the acquisition
policy introduces an additional dimension to the exploration-exploitation problem: each execution
of the policy needs to solve an exploration-exploitation problem, and thus we often need to learn
sophisticated policies.
Most reinforcement learning research has not taken active feature acquisition into consideration. In
this work, we propose a unified approach that jointly learns a policy for optimizing the task reward
while performing active feature acquisition. Although some of the prior works have exploited the use
of reinforcement learning for sequential feature acquisition tasks (Shim et al., 2018; Zannone et al.,
2019), they considered variable-wise information acquisition in a static setting only, corresponding
to feature selection for non-time-dependent prediction tasks. However, our considered setting is
truly time-dependent and feature acquisitions need to be made at each time step while the state of
the system evolves simultaneously. As such, both the model dynamics of the underlying MDP and
the choice of feature acquisition introduce considerable challenges to the learning of the sequential
feature acquisition strategy.
Due to the challenge of the exploration-exploitation problem, it is a non-trivial task to jointly
learn the two policies. The conventional end-to-end approaches often result in inferior solutions in
complex scenarios. Ideally, policies based on high-quality representations would be easier for the
algorithm to search for better solutions through exploration-exploitation. Therefore, our proposed
framework also tackles the joint policy training task from a representation learning perspective.
Specifically, we introduce a representation learning model that not only encodes the sequential
partially observed information into its latent features, but also efficiently imputes the unobserved
features to offer more meaningful information for the policy training. To this end, we formulate a
sequential generative model that can efficiently learn model dynamics during representation learning.
Overall, the contributions of our paper are three-fold:
•	We propose an approach for learning sequential decision making policies with active feature
acquisition through a unified reinforcement learning framework. Our proposed approach
simultaneously learns policies for reward optimization and active feature acquisition.
•	We present a novel sequential representation learning approach to account for the encoding
of the partially observed states. Our proposed approach is based on variational autoencoders
(VAE) with amortized inference. The imputation of the unobserved features is achieved via
learning the model dynamics.
•	We demonstrate our proposed framework can be applied to various applications. We conduct
extensive experiments on an image-based control task as well as a medical simulator fitted
from real-life data where our method shows clear improvements over conventional baselines.
2	Related Work
In this work, we integrate active learning with reinforcement learning to accomplish the policy
training task while attempting to acquire fewest observed features as possible. We thus review related
methods on active feature acquisition and representation learning for POMDP, respectively.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
2.1	Active Feature Acquisition
Our work draws motivation from the existing instance-wise active feature selection approaches. One
category of the instance-wise feature selection methods consider feature acquisition as a one time
effort to select a subset of features as a whole. One typical example is the conventional linear model
that poses sparsity inducing prior distribution to the model (Tibshirani, 1996). Recently, there also
emerged approaches that adopt reinforcement learning to actively find optimal feature subsets (Yoon
et al., 2018; Shim et al., 2018; Zannone et al., 2019). Though such attempts have demonstrated
certain efficacy in handling non time-series instance-wise data, they do not suffice for handling
sequential dataset. There is also an alternative category that models feature acquisition as a Bayesian
experimental design (Ma et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2019). However, the sequential decision making is
for variable-wise feature acquisition and the problems are still non time-series tasks in nature.
The key difference between all the aforementioned approaches and ours is that we tackle active
feature acquisition problems with time-series data, where an active feature selection decision needs
to be formed at each time step along the multi-step reinforcement learning trajectory. Therefore, the
feature acquisition for our presented work needs to consider more complex information over model
dynamics and control, apart from the static instance-wise features.
2.2	Representation Learning in POMDP
In complex tasks, policies trained upon different representations can even converge to different
performance levels. Most conventional deep reinforcement learning approaches unifies the process
of representation learning with policy training and results in policies trained in an end-to-end
fashion (Mnih et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2016). However, to accomplish the
representation learning task, such models often engage trainable parameters which could come with
considerable size and thereby result in significant degradation in sample efficiency.
When considering problems with POMDPs where the state space is partially accessible to the agent,
representation learning becomes an important and non-trivial research challenge. Among the existing
literature, one prominent line of research tackles the representation learning for POMDP in an off-line
fashion and thus resulting in multi-stage reinforcement learning. Higgins et al. (2016; 2017) adopt
pretrained VAE models as a representation module to build agents with strong domain adaptation
performance. The key difference between their work and ours is that they encode instance-wise image
frames from POMDP domains where each image presents a partial view over the task environment,
while our work considers cost-sensitive reinforcement learning with distinct partial observability, i.e.,
the feature-level information is missing at each time step for the agent. We thus adopt a sequential
representation learning approach to infer a more representative state information. Recently, there
also emerged several works on sequential representation learning for POMDP (Gregor et al., 2019;
Vezzani et al., 2019). However, most of the works utilize VAE training as an auxiliary task to jointly
update the representation model with the policy learning loss. In our work, due to the high acquisition
cost to observe the features, we adopt an off-line representation learning setting. Also, our proposed
representation learning is model-based, where the model learns to impute the missing features with
such attempt yielding significant benefit to derive high-quality representation for policy training.
3	Methodology
3.1	Task Setting
In this section, we formally define the problem settings for the task of jointly learning the task and
feature acquisition policy. To this end, we define the active feature acquisition POMDP, a rich class
of discrete-time stochastic control processes generalizing standard POMDPs:
Definition 1 (AFA-POMDP). The active feature acquisition POMDP is a tuple M =
hS, A, T, O, R, C, γi, where S is the state space and A = (Af , Ac) is a joint action space of
feature acquisition actions Af and control actions Ac. The transition kernel T : S × Ac × Af → PS
maps any joint action a = (af , ac) in state s ∈ S to a distribution PS over next states. In each
state s, when taking action af, the agent observes xp = x(af), i.e., a subset of the features
X = (xp, Xu)〜 O(S) indicated by af, where O(S) is a distribution over possiblefeature observation
for state s and xu are features not observed by the agent. When taking a joint action, the agent obtains
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
rewards according to the reward function R: S × Ac → R and pays a cost ofC : S × Af → R+ for
feature acquisition. Rewards and costs are discounted by the discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1).
Simplifying assumptions For simplicity, we assume that x consists of a fixed number of features
Nf for all states, that Af = 2[Nf] is the power set of all the Nf features, and that xp(af) consists of
all the features in x indicated by the subset af ∈ Af. Note that the feature acquisition action for a
specific application can take various different forms. For instance, in our experiments in Section 4,
for the Sepsis task, we define feature acquisition as selecting a subset over possible measurement
tests, whereas for the Bouncing Ball+ task, we divide an image into four observation regions and
let the feature acquisition policy select a subset of observation regions (rather than raw pixels).
Please also note that while in a general AFA-POMDP, the transition between two states depends
on the joint action, we assume in the following that it depends only on the control action, i.e.,
T(s,ac,af0) =T(s,ac, af) for all af0, af ∈ Af. While not true for all possible applications, this
assumption can be a reasonable approximation for instance for medical settings in which tests are
non-invasive. For simplicity we furthermore assume that acquiring each feature has the same cost,
denoted as c, i.e., C(af, s) = c |af |, but our approach can be straightforwardly adapted to have
different costs for different feature acquisitions.
Objective We aim to learn a policy which trades off reward maximization and the cost for feature
acquisition by jointly optimizing a task policy πc and a feature acquisition policy πf . That is, we aim
to solve the optimization problem
max
πf ,πc
∞	|Af|
E X Yt(R(Xt, aC)- X C ∙ I (af⑴))
t=0	i
(1)
f(i)
where the expectation is over the randomness of the stochastic process and the policies, at denotes
the i-th feature acquisition action at timestep t, and I (∙) is an indicator function whose value equals
to 1 if that feature has been acquired.
Note that the above optimization problem is very challenging: an optimal solution needs to maintain
beliefs bt over the state of the system at time t which is a function of partial observations obtained so
far. Both the the feature acquisition policy πf (atf | bt) and the task policy i.e., πc(atc | bt) depend
on this belief. The information in the belief itself can be controlled by the feature acquisition policy
through querying subsets from the features Xt and hence the task policy and feature acquisition policy
itself strongly depend on effectiveness of the feature acquisition policy.
3.2	Sequential Representation Learning with Partial Observations
We introduce a sequential representation learning approach to facilitate the task of policy training
with active feature acquisition. Let X1:T = (X1, ..., XT) and a1:T = (a1, ..., aT) denote a sequence
of observations and actions, respectively. Alternatively, we also denote these sequences as X≤T
and a≤T. Overall, our task of interest is to train a sequential representation learning model to learn
the distribution of the full sequential observations X1:T , i.e., for both the observed part X1p:T and
the unobserved part X1u:T . Given only partial observations, we can perform inference only with the
observed features Xp1:T . Therefore, our proposed approach extends the conventional unsupervised
representation learning task to a supervised learning task, which learns to impute the unobserved
features by synthesizing the acquired information and learning the model dynamics.
As such, the key underlying assumption is that learning to impute the unobserved features would
result in better representations which can be leveraged by the task policy. And performing sequential
representation learning, as we propose, is a more adequate choice than non-sequential modeling,
for our task of interest with partial observability. Furthermore, unlike many conventional sequential
representation learning models for reinforcement learning that only reason over the observation
sequence X1p:T, in our work, we take into account both the observation sequence X1p:T and the action
sequence a1:T for conducting inference. The intuition is that since Xp1:T by itself consists of very
limited information over the agent’s underlying MDP state, incorporating the action sequence would
be an informative add-on to the agent’s acquired information to infer the belief state. To summarize,
our proposed sequential representation model learns to encode X1p:T and a1:T into meaningful latent
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 2: Observation decoder and be-
lief inference model for the partially ob-
servable sequential VAE. Shaded nodes
represent the observed variables. The
inference model filters information over
the partial observations and actions, to
predict both the observed and unob-
served features.
features, for predicting x1p:T and x1u:T. The architecture of our proposed sequential representation
learning model is shown in Figure 2.
Observation Decoder Let z1:T = (z1, ..., zT) denote a sequence of latent states. We consider the
following probabilistic model:
T
pθ(xp,xu,z) = Yp(xtp,xtu|zt)p(zt),	(2)
For simplicity of the notations, we assume z0 = 0. We impose a simple prior distribution over z, i.e.,
a standard Gaussian prior, instead of incorporating some learned prior distribution over the latent
space of z, such as an autoregressive prior distribution like p(zt|zt-1, x1p:t, a0:t-1). The reason is
that using a static prior distribution results in latent representation zt that is stronger regularized
and more normalized than using a learned prior distribution which is stochastically changing over
time. This is crucial for deriving stable policy training performance. At time t, the generation of
data xtp and xtu depends on the corresponding latent variable zt . Given zt, the observed variables are
conditionally independent of the unobserved ones. Therefore,
p(xtp, xtu|zt) =p(xtp|zt)p(xtu|zt).	(3)
Belief Inference Model During policy training we only assume access to partially observed data.
This requires an inference model which takes in the past observation and action sequences to infer
the latent states z. Specifically, we present a structured inference network qφ as shown in Figure 2,
which has an autoregressive structure:
qφ(z∣x, a) = ∏qφ(zt ∣x≤t, a<t),	(4)
t
where qφ(∙) is a function that aggregates the filtering posteriors of the history of observation and
action sequences. Following the common practice in existing sequential VAE literature, we adopt a
forward RNN model as the backbone for the filtering function qφ(∙) (Gregor et al., 2019). Specifically,
at step t, the RNN processes the encoded partial observation xtp, action at-1 and its past hidden state
ht-1 to update its hidden state ht. Then the latent distribution zt is inferred from ht. The belief state
bt is defined as the mean of the distribution zt . By accomplishing the supervised learning task, the
belief state could provide abundant information for not only the observed sequential features, but also
for the missing features, so that the policy trained over it could benefit from it and progress faster
towards getting better convergent performance.
Learning We proposed to pre-train both the generative and inference models offline before learning
the RL policies. In this case, we assume the access to the unobserved features, so that we can construct
a supervised learning task to learn to impute unobserved features. Concretely, the pre-training task
update the parameters θ, φ by maximizing the following variational lower-bound (Jordan et al., 1999;
Kingma & Welling, 2013):
logp(xp, xu) ≥ Eqφ hχlogPθ(xp∣Zt) + logPθ(xu∣zt) - KL(qφ(zt∣x≤t, a<t) ||P(Zt))i
= ELBO(xp,xu).	(5)
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
By incorporating the term logpθ(xU∣zt), the training of sequential VAE generalizes from an UnsuPer-
vised task to a supervised task that learns the model dynamics from past observed transitions and
imputes the missing features.
We perform multi-stage reinforcement learning to jointly learn the feature acquisition policy and the
task policy. The VAE model is pretrained and kept fixed during policy learning. The reason for not
updating VAE online is that computing the loss in Eq (5) would require the access to unobserved
features and therefore, is cost intensive. The pseudocode for our proposed method is in Appendix A.
4	Experiments
We examine the characteristics of our proposed model in the following two experimental domains:
a bouncing ball control task with high-dimensional image pixels as input, adapted from (Fraccaro
et al., 2017); a sepsis medical simulator fitted from real-world data (Oberst & Sontag, 2019).
Baselines For comparison, we mainly consider variants of the strong VAE baseline beta-VAE (Hig-
gins et al., 2016), which works on non-time-dependent data instances. For representing the missing
features, we adopt the zero-imputing method, proposed in (Nazabal et al., 2018) over the unobserved
features. Thus, we denote the VAE baseline as NonSeq-ZI. We train the VAE with either the full
loss over the entire features, or the partial loss which only applies to the observed features (Ma
et al., 2019). We denoted our proposed sequential VAE model for POMDPs as Seq-PO-VAE. All the
VAE-based approaches adopt an identical policy architecture. Detailed information on the model
architecture is presented in appendix.
Data Collection To pre-train the VAE models, data generated by a non-random policy is unavoid-
ably needed to incorporate abundant dynamics information. For both tasks, we collect a small scale
dataset of 2000 trajectories, where half of the data is collected from a random policy and the the other
half from a policy which better captures the state space that would be encountered by a learned model
(e.g., by training a data collection policy end-to-end or using human generated trajectories). The
simple mixture of dataset works very well on both tasks without the need of further fine-tuning the
VAEs. We also create a testing set that consists of 2000 trajectories to evaluate the models.
4.1	B ouncing Ball+
Task Settings We adapted the original bouncing ball experiment presented in (Fraccaro et al.,
2017) by adding a navigation objective and introducing control actions. Specifically, a ball moves in
a 2D box and at each step, a binary image of size 32 × 32 showing the box and the ball. Initially, the
ball appears at a random position in the upper left quadrant, and has a random velocity. The objective
is to control the ball to reach a fixed target location set at (5, 25). We incorporate five RL actions: a
null action and four actions for changing the velocity of the ball in either the x or y direction with a
fixed scale: {∆Vx : ±0.5, ∆Vy : ±0.5, null}. A reward of 1.0 is issued if the ball reaches its target
location. Each episode runs up to 50 time steps.
Table 1: Imputing loss evaluated on missing features for Bouncing Ball+ and Sepsis. Each setting is
evaluated for 3 random seeds.
VAE model	B ouncing Ball+ (NLL)	Sepsis (MSE)
NonSeq-ZI (partial)	0.5846 (± 0.0544)	1.1954 (±0.2521)
NonSeq-ZI (full)	0.0728 (± 0.0004)	0.5217 (± 0.0016)
SEQ-PO-VAE (OURS)	0.0284 (± 0.0002)	0.1724 (±0.0064)
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
csouWM) seQMiJ
—NonSeq-Zi (mil)
NonSeq-ZI (partial)
End-to-End
-Ours
10	20	30	40	50
steps (Ie4)
csouWM) seQMiJ
steps (Ie4)
Figure 3: Performance curves on the bouncing ball+ domain: a: episodic number of observations
acquired by the πf ; b: task rewards w/o cost. Our proposed method outperforms the non-sequential
baselines in learning the task as well as acquiring less observations; c: Ablation study on bouncing
ball+ to illustrate the effect of learning the feature acquisition policy. Each method is run with 10
random seeds. Our proposed approach outperforms the random baseline significantly in terms of task
performance.
Figure 4: Seq-PO-VAE reconstruction for the online trajectories upon convergence (better to view
enlarged). Each block of three rows corresponds to the results for one trajectory. In each block, the
three rows (top-down) correspond to: (1) the partially observable input selected by acquisition policy;
(2) the ground-truth full observation; (3) reconstruction from Seq-PO-VAE. The green boxes remark
the frames where ball is not observed but our model could impute its location. Key takeaways: (1) our
learned acquisition policy captures model dynamics ; (2) Seq-PO-VAE effectively impute the missing
features (i.e., ball can be reconstructed even when they are unobserved from consequent frames).
Representation Learning Results We evaluate the missing feature imputing performance of each
VAE model in terms of negative log likelihood (nll) loss and present results in Table 1. We notice
that our proposed model yields to significantly better imputing result than all the other baselines.
This reveals the fact that our proposed sequential VAE model can efficiently capture the environment
dynamics and learn meaningful information over the missing features. Such effect is vital in
determining the policy training performance in AFA-POMDP, since the policy is conditioned on the
VAE latent features. We also demonstrate sample trajectories reconstructed by different VAE models
in the Appendix. The result shows that our model learns to impute significant amount of missing
information given the partially observed sequence.
Policy Training Results We evaluate the policy training performance in terms of episodic number
of acquired observations and the task rewards (w/o cost). The results are presented in Figure 3 (a)
and (b), respectively. First, we notice that the end-to-end method is vital and fails to learn task skills
under the given feature acquisition cost. However, the VAE-based representation learning methods
manage to learn the navigation skill under the same cost setting. This verifies our assumption that
representation learning could bring significant benefit to the policy training under the AFA-POMDP
scenario. Furthermore, we also notice that the joint policies trained by Seq-PO-VAE can develop
the target navigation skill at a much faster pace than the non-sequential baselines. Our method also
converges to a standard where much less feature acquisition is required to perform the task.
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
steps (le4)
Λμ-e七 OlU
O 200	400	600	800
steps (le4)
-sou 0spBMaJ
Figure 5: Performance curves for the compared approaches on Sepsis. The curves are derived under
cost value of 0.01. Overall, our method converges to treatment policy with substantially better reward
compared to the baselines.
We also show that our proposed method can learn meaningful feature acquisition policies. To this end,
we show three sampled trajectories upon convergence of training in Figure 4. From the examples, we
notice that our feature acquisition policy acquires meaningful features with a majority grasping the
exact ball location. Thus, it demonstrates that the feature acquisition policy adapts to the dynamics of
the problem and learns to acquire meaningful features. We also show the actively learned feature
acquisition policy works better than random acquisition. From the results in Figure 4 (c), our method
converges to better standard than random policies with considerably high selection probabilities.
4.2	Sepsis Medical Simulator
Task Setting Our second evaluation domain adopts a medical simulator for treating sepsis among
ICU patients, proposed in (Oberst & Sontag, 2019). Overall, the task is to learn to apply three
treatment actions to the patient, i.e, {antibiotic, ventilation, vasopressors}. The state space consists of
8 features: 3 of them indicate the current treatment state for the patient; 4 of them are the measurement
states over heart rate, sysBP rate, percoxyg state and glucose level; the rest is an index specifying the
patent’s diabetes condition. The feature acquisition policy learns to actively select the measurement
features. Each episode runs for up to 30 steps. The patient will be discharged if his/her measurement
states all return to normal values. An episode terminates upon mortality or discharge, with a reward
-1.0 or 1.0.
Representation Learning Result We evaluate the imputation performance for each VAE model
on the testing dataset. The loss is evaluated in terms of MSE, presented in Table 1. Our proposed
method leads to the lowest MSE loss compared to the baselines. The result reveals that our proposed
sequential VAE could promisingly learn model dynamics for tasks with stochastic transitions.
Policy Training Result We show the policy training results for Sepsis in Figure 5. Overall, our
proposed method results in substantially better task reward compared to all baselines. Noticeably,
the learning of discharge for our method progresses significantly faster than baseline approaches
and converges to substantially better values. The result shows that our method can be trained in
a much more sample efficient way. Moreover, upon convergence, our model outperforms the best
non-sequential VAE baseline with a gap of > 5% for discharge ratio. For all the evaluation metrics,
we notice that VAE-based representation learning models outperform the end-to-end baseline by
significant margins. This indicates that efficient representation learning may be crucial for deriving
satisfying task performance in AFA-POMDP setting. The result also reveals that learning to impute
missing features contributes greatly to improve the policy training performance for AFA-POMDP.
Ablation: Efficacy of Active Feature Acquisition We study the effect of actively learning sequen-
tial feature acquisition strategy with RL. To this end, we compare our method with a baseline that
randomly acquires features. We evaluate our method under different cost values, and the results are
shown in Figure 6. From the results, we notice that there is a clear cost-performance trade-off, i.e., a
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
(tt0u O∕M) PJroM ① α
253
75%z
c=0
* c=0.01
—c=0.02
—c=0.025
+ C=0.05
■» Random
1.4
O1-2
I 1.0
u 0.8
<
6 0.6
N
百。4
° 0.2
0.0
le7
-0.6	-0.4	-0.2	0.0	0.2	0.4
Reward (w∕o cost)
10	20	30	40	50	60	70
Episodic No. Features
Figure 6:	The task reward and episodic no. fea-
ture acquisitions derived upon convergence for
our method, when training our model under dif-
ferent cost values. We also present the results for a
baseline that trains the task policy under a random
feature acquisition strategy. The actively learned
feature acquisition leads to significant advantage
compared to random acquisition.
Figure 7:	This figure shows the total number of
features acquired (y-value) to obtain certain re-
ward standard (x-value), when training the task
policy using different representation learning ap-
proaches. The presented methods adopt a cost
c = 0.01. Our method results in the best achiev-
able reward (max x-value) with lowest slope.
higher feature acquisition cost results in feature acquisition policies that obtain fewer observations,
with a sacrifice of task performance. Overall, our acquisition method results in significantly better
task performance than the random acquisition baselines. Noticeably, with the learned active feature
acquisition strategy, we acquire only about half of the total number of features (refer to the value
derived by Random-100%) to obtain comparable task performance. Also, we notice that the specified
cost has a very clear impact on the final task performance, i.e., the number of acquired features per
episode decreases significantly as the cost increases. Thereby, our proposed solution can promisingly
compute feature acquisition policies that meet different budgets.
Ablation: Impact on Total Acquisition Cost For different representation learning methods, we
also investigate the total number of features acquired at different stage of training. The results are
shown in Figure 7. As expected, to obtain better task policies, the models need to take longer training
steps and thus the total feature acquisition cost would increases accordingly. We notice that policies
trained by our method result in the highest convergent task performance (max x-value). Given
a certain performance level (same x-value), our method consumes substantially less total feature
acquisition cost (y-value) than the others. We also notice that the overall feature acquisition cost
increases with a near exponential trend. Therefore, it is essential to train the policy for AFA-POMDP
with advanced representation learning method, so that the feature acquisition cost could be reduced.
5	Conclusion
We present a novel AFA-POMDP framework that jointly learns the task policy and the active feature
acquisition strategy with a unified reinforcement learning formalism. We introduce a model-based
sequential VAE model to facilitate policy training under partial observability. We demonstrate that
imputing missing features via learning model dynamics could significantly benefit policy training
with partial observability. Our proposed model, by efficiently synthesizing the sequential information
to impute the missing features, can significantly outperform conventional representation learning
baselines and leads to policy training with significantly better sample efficiency as well as obtained
solutions. Future work may investigate whether our proposed model could be applied to more diverse
and complex application domains. Another promising direction is to integrate our framework with
model-based planning for further reducing the feature acquisition cost.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Ethics S tatement
When deploying machine learning models in real-world applications, the fundamental assumption
that the features used during training are always readily available during the deployment phase
does not necessarily hold. Our work addresses the aforementioned problem via formulating a novel
AFA-POMDP framework that extends the conventional instance-wise non-time-dependent active
feature acquisition task to a more challenging time-dependent sequential decision making task. The
sequential active feature acquisition module enables the decision making to be performed in a more
cost-efficient way when partial features are accessed only during model deployment.
Considering that the task of learning and applying machine learning models is rather problem specific,
it is unlikely that our method can equally benefit all possible application scenarios. We also fully
acknowledge the existence of risk in applying our model in sensitive and high risk domains, e.g.,
healthcare, and its potential bias if the model itself or the used representations are trained on biased
data. In high risk settings, human supervision of the proposed model might be desired and the
model is suggested to be mainly used for decision support systems. To alleviate the reliance on fully
observed data during representation learning, it is very promising to trigger follow-up works studying
data efficient sequential autoencoder training paradigms.
References
Anthony R Cassandra. A survey of pomdp applications. In Working notes of AAAI 1998 fall
symposium on planning with partially observable Markov decision processes, volume 1724, 1998.
Abhishek Das, SatWik Kottur, Jose MF Moura, Stefan Lee, and DhrUv Batra. Learning cooperative
visual dialog agents with deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pp. 2951-2960, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
via policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 49-58, 2016.
Marco Fraccaro, Simon Kamronn, Ulrich Paquet, and Ole Winther. A disentangled recognition
and nonlinear dynamics model for unsupervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 3601-3610, 2017.
Wenbo Gong, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Sebastian Nowozin, Richard E. Turner, Jose Miguel Hemandez-
Lobato, and Cheng Zhang. Icebreaker: Element-Wise efficient information acquisition With a
bayesian deep latent gaussian model. In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 14791-14802, 2019.
Karol Gregor, George Papamakarios, Frederic Besse, Lars Buesing, and Theophane Weber. Temporal
difference variational auto-encoder. ICLR, 2019.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
constrained variational framework. In ICLR, 2016.
Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Andrei Rusu, Loic Matthey, Christopher Burgess, Alexander Pritzel, Matthew
Botvinick, Charles Blundell, and Alexander Lerchner. Darla: Improving zero-shot transfer in
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-
Volume 70, pp. 1480-1490, 2017.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction to
variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37(2):183-233, 1999.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. ICLR,
2016.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Yuan Ling, Sadid A Hasan, Vivek Datla, Ashequl Qadir, Kathy Lee, Joey Liu, and Oladimeji
Farri. Learning to diagnose: assimilating clinical narratives using deep reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 895-905, 2017.
Chao Ma, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Konstantina Palla, Jose MigUel Hernandez-Lobato, Sebastian
Nowozin, and Cheng Zhang. EDDI: efficient dynamic discovery of high-value information with
partial VAE. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
4234-4243, 2019.
Stefan Mathe, Aleksis Pirinen, and Cristian SminchisescU. Reinforcement learning for visUal object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 2894-2902, 2016.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray KavUkcUoglU, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis AntonogloU, Daan
Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray KavUkcUoglU, David Silver, Andrei A. RUsU, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis AntonogloU, Helen King, Dharshan KUmaran, Daan Wierstra,
Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. HUman-level control throUgh deep reinforcement learning.
Nature, 518(7540):529-533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria PUigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
Harley, David Silver, and Koray KavUkcUoglU. AsynchronoUs methods for deep reinforcement
learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928-1937, 2016.
Alfredo Nazabal, Pablo M Olmos, ZoUbin Ghahramani, and Isabel Valera. Handling incomplete
heterogeneoUs data Using vaes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03653, 2018.
Michael Oberst and David Sontag. CoUnterfactUal off-policy evalUation with gUmbel-max strUctUral
caUsal models. In ICML, 2019.
YU-Shao Peng, Kai-FU Tang, HsUan-Tien Lin, and Edward Chang. RefUel: Exploring sparse featUres
in deep reinforcement learning for fast disease diagnosis. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 7322-7331, 2018.
Hajin Shim, SUng JU Hwang, and EUnho Yang. Joint active featUre acqUisition and classification with
variable-size set encoding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1368-1378,
2018.
David Silver, Aja HUang, Chris J Maddison, ArthUr GUez, LaUrent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
JUlian Schrittwieser, Ioannis AntonogloU, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neUral networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484, 2016.
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267-288, 1996.
GiUlia Vezzani, Abhishek GUpta, Lorenzo Natale, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning latent state representa-
tion for speeding Up exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12621, 2019.
JinsUng Yoon, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Invase: Instance-wise variable selection
Using neUral networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Sara Zannone, Jose Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, Cheng Zhang, and Konstantina Palla. Odin: Optimal
discovery of high-valUe information Using model-based deep reinforcement learning. In ICML
Real-world Sequential Decision Making Workshop, 2019.
Marvin Zhang, Sharad Vikram, Laura Smith, Pieter Abbeel, Matthew J Johnson, and Sergey Levine.
Solar: Deep structured latent representations for model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
APPENDIX
This appendix is organized as follows:
•	Sec A: the detailed algorithm.
•	Sec B: experimental settings and additional results on the Bouncing Ball domain.
•	Sec C: experimental settings and additional results on the Sepsis domain.
A RL with Active Feature Acquisition Algorithm
Algorithm 1 RL with Active Feature Acquisition
1:	Input: learning rate α > 0, dataset D
2:	Initialize RL policy πf, πc, VAE parameters θ, φ.
3:	Train VAE on dataset D using Eq (5).
4:	while Not Converge do
5:	Reset the environment.
6:	Initialize null observation Xp = 0, feature acquisition action af and control action a0.
7:	for i = 1 to T do
8:	Compute representation with VAE: bt = qφ (Xp≤t, a<t).
9:	Sample a feature acquisition action af 〜∏f (bt) and a control action aC 〜∏ (bt).
10:	Step the environment and receive partial features, reward and terminal: xp+ι,rt, term 〜
env(atf,atc)
11:	Compute cost Ct = Pi C ∙ I(af (i)).
12:	Save the transitions {bt, atf , atc, rt, ct, term}.
13:	if term then
14:	break
15:	end if
16:	end for
17:	Update πf , πc using the saved transitions with an RL algorithm under learning rate α.
18:	end while
B B ouncing Ball+
B.1	Task Specification
The task consists of a ball moving in a 2D box of size 32 × 32 pixels. The radius of the ball equals to 2
pixels. At each step, a binary image is returned as an observation of the MDP state. At the beginning
of every episode, the ball starts at a random position in the upper left quadrant (sampled uniformly).
The initial velocity of the ball is randomly defined as follows: V = [VX, Vy] = 4 ∙ v∕∣∣v∣∣, where the
x- and y-component of ~v are sampled uniformly from the interval [-0.5, 0.5]. There is a navigation
target set at (5, 25) pixels, which is in the lower left quadrant. The navigation is considered to be
successful if the ball reaches the specified target location within a threshold of 1 pixel along both
x/y-axis.
The action spaces is defined as follows. There are five task actions Ac :
•	Increase velocity leftwards, i.e., change Vx by -0.5
•	Increase velocity rightwards, i.e., change Vx by +0.5
•	Increase velocity downwards, i.e., change Vy by +0.5
•	Increase velocity upwards, i.e., change Vy by -0.5
•	Keep velocities unchanged
The maximum velocity along the x/y-axis is 5.0. The velocity will stay unchanged if it exceeds this
threshold. The feature acquisition action af ∈ Af is specified as acquiring the observation of a subset
12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
of the quadrants (this also includes acquiring the observation of all 4 quadrants). Thus, the agent can
acquire 0 - 4 quadrants to observe. Each episode runs up to 50 steps. The episode terminates if agent
reaches the target location.
B.2	Implementation Details
For all the compared methods, Zero-Imputing (Nazabal et al., 2018) is adopted to fill in missing
features with a fixed value of 0.5.
End-to-End The end-to-end model first processes the imputed image by 2 convolutional layers
with filter sizes of 16 and 32, respectively. Each convolutional layer is followed by a ReLU activation
function. Then the output is passed to a fully connected layer of size 1024. The weights for
the fully connected layer are initialized by orthogonal weights initialization and the biases are
initialized as zeros.
NonSeq-ZI The non-sequential VAE models first process the imputed image by 2 convolutional
layers with filter sizes of 32 and 64, respectively. Each convolutional layer is followed by a ReLU
activation function. Then the output passes through a fully connected layer of size 256, followed
by two additional fully connected layers of size 32 to generate the mean and variance of a Gaussian
distribution. To decode an image, the sampled code first passes through a fully connected layer with
size 256, followed by 3 convolutional layers with filters of 32, 32, and nc and strides of 2, 2 and 1,
respectively, where nc is the channel size that equals to 2 for the binary image. There are two variants
for NonSeq-ZI: one employs the partial loss that is only for the observed variables; the other employs
the full loss that is computed on all the variables, i.e., the ground-truth image with full observation is
employed as the target to train the model to impute the missing features. The hyperparameters for
training NonSeq-ZI are summarized in Table 2.
	Hyperparameter				
	β (KL weight)	KL reduction Loss reduction		learning rate	epochs
NonSeq-ZI (partial)	1.0	sum	sum	1e-4	1k
NonSeq-ZI (full)	1.0	sum	sum	1e-4	1k
Seq-PO-VAE (ours)	1.0	sum	sum	5e-4	2k
Table 2: Hyperparameter settings for training VAE models on the Bouncing Ball+ dataset.
Seq-PO-VAE (ours) At each step, the Seq-PO-VAE takes an imputed image and an action vector
of size 9 as input. The imputed image is processed by 3 convolutional layers with filter size 32
and stride 2. Each convolutional layer employs ReLU as its activation function. Then the output
passes through a fully connected layer of size 32 to generate a latent representation for the image
fx . The action vector passes through a fully connected layer of 32 to generate latent representation
for the action fa . Then the image and action features are concatenated and augmented to form a
feature vector fc = [fχ, fa, fχ * fa], where [∙] denotes concatenation of features. Then fc is fed to
fully connected projection layers of size 64 and 32, respectively. The output is then fed to an LSTM
module, with latent size of 32. The output ht of LSTM is passed to two independent fully connected
layers of size 32 for each to generate the mean and variance for the Gaussian distribution filtered from
the sequential inputs. To decode an image, the model adopts deconvolutional layers that are identical
to those for NonSeq-ZI. The hyperparameters for training Seq-PO-VAE are shown in Table 2.
LSTM-A3C We adopt LSTM-A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) to train the RL policy. The policy takes the
features derived from the representation learning module as input. For the VAE-based methods, the
input features are passed through a fully connected layer of size 1024. Then the features are fed to an
LSTM with 1024 units. The output of the LSTM is fed to three independent fully connected layers to
generate the estimations for value, task policy and feature acquisition policy. We adopt normalized
column initialization for all the fully connected layers and the biases for the LSTM module are set to
be zero.
13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
B.3	Data Collection
To train the VAEs, we prepare a training set that consists of 2000 trajectories. Half of the trajectories
are derived from a random policy and the other half is derived from a policy learned from end-to-end
method. To train the end-to-end method, we employ a cost of 0.01 over first 2m steps and then
increase it to 0.02 for the following 0.5m steps. All the VAE models are evaluated on a test dataset
that has identical size and data distribution as the training dataset. We present the best achieved task
performance of the data collection policy (End-to-End) and our representation learning approach in
Table 5. We notice that our proposed method, by employing an advanced representation model, leads
to significantly better feature acquisition policy than End-to-End (smaller number of observations
while achieving similar or better reward).
Model
End-to-End Ours
Average # of observations per episode	17.94	8.24
Task reward 1.0	1.0
Table 3: Task performance for the data collection policy and our method on Bouncing Ball+ .
14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
B.4	Imputing Missing Features via Learning Model Dynamics
We present an illustrative example to demonstrate the process of imputing missing features and the
role of learning model dynamics. To this end, we collect trajectories under an End-to-End policy (the
choice of the underlying RL policy is not that important since we just want to derive some trajectory
samples for the VAE models to reconstruct) and use different VAE models to impute the observations.
From the results presented in Figure 9, we observe that under the partially observable setting with
missing features, the latent representation derived from our proposed method provides abundant
information as compared to only using information from a single time step and thereby offers
significant benefit for the policy model to learn to acquire meaningful features/gain task reward.
Figure 8: Imputation results for different VAE models. We select 9 trajectories obtained from the
trained End-to-End policy. Each block corresponds to the results for one trajectory (better to view
enlarged). The five rows in one block are (top-down): (1) partial observations acquired by the agent;
(2) ground-truth image with full observation; (3) Imputation by NoSeq-ZI (partial); (4) Imputation by
NoSeq-ZI (full); (5) Imputation by Seq-PO-VAE (ours). Our model can often successfully predict the
balls location even if it is not present in the acquired observation. Hence it successfully employs its
learned knowledge of the dynamics. In contrast, the non-sequential model (obviously) fails to predict
the balls location when the ball is not present in the observation.
15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
B.5	Investigation on Cost-Performance Trade-off
We perform a case study on investigating the cost-performance trade-off for each representation
learning method, presented in Figure 9. Apparently, as we increase the cost, the exploration-
exploitation task becomes more challenging and each compared method has its own upper bound on
the cost above which it fails to learn an effective task policy while acquiring minimum observation.
First, we notice that the End-to-End model takes a long time to progress in learning task skills, while
the VAE-based models can progress much faster. Among the VAE-based methods, we notice that our
proposed method (Figure 9(d)) can achieve as low as 8 observations whereas the baselines NonSeq-ZI
(FUll) (Figure 9(b)) and NonSeq-ZI (partial) (Figure 9(c)) achieve a standard of 〜20 (lowest point
among the solid lines). Thus, we could conclude that our proposed approach can significantly benefit
the cost-sensitive policy training and lead to a policy which acquires much fewer observations while
still succeeding in terms of task performance.
(a) End-to-End
steps (le4)
(b) NonSeq-ZI (full)
(C) NonSeq-ZI (partial)
30 40 50 60 70
steps(le4)
Seo-PO-VAE (C=O.O25)
Sefl-PO-VAE (C=0.03)
Seq-PO-VAE (c=0.035)
—Seq-PO-VAE (C=0.04)
—setI-Po-VAE(C=O.045)
—Seq-PO-VAE (c=0.05)
SUOAeAJgSqO-EnU 2po--d9
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
steps (le4)

(d) Seq-PO-VAE (ours)
Figure 9: Cost-performance trade-off investigation. Each row corresponds to the performance in
terms of task reward and episodic number of acquisitions obtained for a specific method (see legends).
Each curve is derived from 3 independent runs. We use dotted lines to indicate those instances when
the task learning does not always succeed. Thus, the best achievable number of observations should
be referred to as the lowest curve among the solid lines.
16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
C Sepsis Medical S imulator
C.1 Task Specifications
For this task we employ a Sepsis simulator proposed in previous work (Oberst & Sontag, 2019).
The task is to learn to apply three treatment actions for Sepsis patients in intensive care units, i.e.,
Ac = {antibiotic, ventilation, vasopressors}. At each time step, the agent selects a subset of the
treatment actions to apply. The state space consists of 8 features: 3 of them specify the current
treatment status; 4 of them specify the measurement status in terms of heart rate, sysBP rate,
percoxyg stage and glucose level; the remaining one is a categorical feature indicating the patent’s
antibiotic status. The feature acquisition actively selects a subset among the measurement features
for observation, i.e., Af = {heart rate, sysBP rate, percoxyg state, glucose level}. The objective
for learning a active feature acquisition strategy is to help the decision making system to reduce
measurement cost at a significant scale.
C.2 Implementation Details
For all the compared methods, we adopt Zero-Imputing (Nazabal et al., 2018) to fill in missing
features. In particular, a fixed value of -10 which is outside the range of feature values is used to
impute missing values.
End-to-End The end-to-end model first processes the imputed state by 3 fully connected layers of
size 32, 64 and 32, respectively. Each fully connected layer is followed by a ReLU activation.
NonSeq-ZI The VAE model first processes the imputed state by 2 fully connected layers with size
32 and 64, with the first fully connected layer being followed by ReLU activation functions. Then the
output is fed into two independent fully connected layers of size 10 for each, to generate the mean
and variance for the Gaussian distribution. To decode the state, the latent code is first processed by a
fully connected layer of size 64, then fed into three fully connected layers of size 64, 32, and 8. The
intermediate fully connected layers employ ReLU activation functions. Also, we adopt two variants
for NonSeq-ZI, trained under either full loss or partial loss. The details of the hyperparameter settings
used for training are presented in Table 4.
Hyperparameter
	β (KL weight)	KL reduction	Loss reduction	learning rate	epochs
NonSeq-ZI (partial)	0.01	sum	sum	1e-4	1k
NonSeq-ZI (full)	0.01	sum	sum	1e-4	1k
Seq-PO-VAE (ours)	0.01	sum	sum	1e-3	1k
Table 4: Hyperparameter settings for training VAE models on the Sepsis dataset.
Seq-PO-VAE (ours) At each time step, the inputs for state and action are first processed by their
corresponding projection layers. The projection layers for the state consists of 3 fully connected
layers of size 32, 16 and 10, where the intermediate fully connected layers are followed by a ReLU
activation function. The projection layer for the action input is a fully connected layer of size 10.
Then the projected state feature fc and action feature fa are combined in the following manner:
fc = [fχ, fa, fχ * fa]. fc is passed to 2 fully connected layers of size 64 and 32 to form the input to the
LSTM module. The output ht of the LSTM is fed to two independent fully connected layers of size
10 to generate the mean and variance for the Gaussian distribution. The decoder for Seq-PO-VAE has
identical architecture as NonSeq-ZI. The details for training Seq-PO-VAE are presented in Table 4.
LSTM-A3C The LSTM-A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) takes encoded state features derived from the
corresponding representation model as its input. The encoded featuresare fed into an LSTM with size
256. Then the ht for the LSTM is fed to three independent fully connected layers, to predict the state
value, feature acquisition policy and task policy. Normalized column initialization is applied to all
fully connected layers. The biases for the LSTM and fully connected layers are initialized as zero.
17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
C.3 Data Collection
To train the VAEs, we prepare a training set that consists of 2000 trajectories. Half of the trajectories
are derived from a random policy and the other half is derived from a policy learned from the
End-to-End method with cost 0.0. All the VAE models are evaluated on a test dataset that consists of
identical size and data distribution as the the training dataset. We present the task treatment reward
obtained by our data collection policy derived from the End-to-End method and that obtained by our
proposed method in Table 5. Noticeably, by performing representation learning, we obtained much
better treatment reward as compared to the data collection policy, which demonstrates the necessity
of performing representation learning.
Model
End-to-End Ours
Treatment Reward 0.35	0.45
Table 5: Task performance for the data collection policy and our proposed method on Sepsis.
C.4 More Comparison Result under Different Values for Cost
We present additional experiment results that compare our proposed method and the non-sequential
baselines under the cost values {0, 0.025}. The results for cost value of 0.01 are shown in the main
paper. Overall, under all the cost settings, our method leads to significantly better discharge ratio and
task reward compared to the baselines.
200	400	600	800	1000
steps (le4)
(a) Cost=0
QS8 EM)peMaJ
-NonSeq-ZltfuII)
—NonSeq-ZI(PartIaI)
—Ours
0	200	400	600	800	1000
steps (le4)
0.45
—Nonseq-Znruii)
—NonSeq-ZI(PartIaI)
—Ours
0.35
空 0.30
ra
E。・25
≡ 0.20
0.15
0.10
6	200	400	600	800 IOOO
steps (le4)
(b) Cost=0.025
2 10 12 3
■ ■■■■■
Oooooo
- - -
QS8m PjeMaJ
一NOnSeq-ZKf 31)
—.NonSeq-ZI(PartIaI)
—Ours
O 2Q0	400	600	800 IOOO
steps (le4)
Figure 10:	Comparison result between our proposed method and the non-sequential VAE baseline
models under different values for cost. Each curve is derived from 3 independent runs.
18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Also, we demonstrate the cost-performance trade-off on Sepsis domain. By increasing the value
of cost, we could obtain feature acquisition policy that acquires substantially decreased amount of
features within each episode.
Figure 11:	Average number of observations acquired in each episode when training our proposed
model under different cost values.
C.5 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES FOR MISSING FEATURE IMPUTATION IN Sepsis
We present two illustrative examples in Figure 12 to demonstrate how imputing missing features via
learning model dynamics would help the decision making with partial observability in Sepsis domain.
The policy training process with partial observability could only access very limited information, due
to the employment of active feature acquisition. Under such circumstances, imputing the missing
features would offer much more abundant information to the decision making process. From the
results shown in Figure 12, our model demonstrates considerable accuracy in imputing the missing
features, even though it is extremely challenging to perform the missing feature imputation task given
the distribution shift from the data collection policy and the online policy. The imputed missing
information would be greatly beneficial for training the task policy and feature acquisition policy.
Figure 12: Two example trajectories for illustrating how our method works on the Sepsis medical
domain. The acquisition policy is trained with a cost of 0. Each block corresponds to one trajectory
and the four rows correspond to the four measurement features being considered for active feature
acquisition. Each dot indicates the employment of feature acquisition on the corresponding measure-
ment feature at the presented time point. In each trajectory, we demonstrate the ground-truth signal
over time as well as the imputed signal over time predicted by our proposed Seq-PO-VAE model.
By imputing the missing features via learning model dynamics, our proposed method could offer
much more informative representation for the policy training compared to the non-sequential VAE
baselines, and thus significantly benefit the policy training with partial observability.
φso°-6
6AXO°∙Jφd
ceφu
φso°-6
19