Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A Collaborative Attention Adaptive Network
for Financial Market Forecasting
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Forecasting the financial market with social media data and real market prices is a
valuable issue for market participants, which helps traders make more appropriate
trading decisions. However, taking into account the differences of different data
types, how to use a fusion method adapted to financial data to fuse real market
prices and tweets from social media, so that the prediction model can fully in-
tegrate different types of data remains a challenging problem. To address these
problems, we propose a collaborative attention adaptive Transformer approach to
financial market forecasting (CAFF), including parallel extraction of tweets and
price features, parameter-level fusion and a joint feature processing module, that
can successfully deeply fuse tweets and real prices in view of the fusion method.
Extensive experimentation is performed on tweets and historical price of stock
market, our method can achieve a better accuracy compared with the state-of-the-
art methods on two evaluation metrics. Moreover, tweets play a relatively more
critical role in the CAFF framework. Additional stock trading simulations show
that an actual trading strategy based on our proposed model can increase profits;
thus, the model has practical application value.
1	Introduction
In recent years, the use of social media information to predict the financial market has attracted
the attention of more and more researchers, and some satisfactory experimental results have been
achieved. This is due to the fact that social media information contains investor-related attitudes
and subjective sentiments to the financial market, resulting in many investment banks and hedge
funds trying to dig out valuable information from media information to help better predict financial
markets, which play a key role in predicting the market. At the same time, the efficient market
hypothesis (EMH) introduced by Fama (1970) points out that the current price of the asset reflects all
the prior information that is immediately available. Therefore, using social media information and
the actual price of the current financial market seems to be able to complete the market forecasting
more accurately.
To the best of our knowledge, the different types of data fusion methods commonly used in the field
of financial market forecasting are mainly concatenation or weighted sums. They are simple, direct,
and almost no parameter exchange methods to achieve data fusion (Xu & Cohen, 2018; Perez-Rua
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019). In the field of computer vision (CV), multimodal fusion methods are
mainly used for the fusion of data based on text and images. By realizing the interaction of differ-
ent information, extracting rich feature information, and obtaining satisfactory experimental results
(Baltrusaitis et al., 2019). It can be seen that the multimodal fusion method in the CV field seems
to be more conducive to feature exchange and feature supplementation than the current method in
the financial field (Lu et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2017). Therefore, we can infer that choosing an adap-
tive financial data fusion algorithm to achieve the integration of social media information and actual
market prices is effective for improving the forecasting effect of the financial market. However, the
current financial market forecasting field basically does not consider too many modal fusion meth-
ods, which may be one of the reasons that limit the current forecasting effect. In addition, the role
of text and historical prices in the fusion method is different from multimodal fusion tasks, such as
face recognition, medical aided diagnosis, and visual analysis. The fundamental reason is that the
application scenarios are inconsistent, the source data for other tasks is objective, and the financial
data is affected by the sentiment of market investors. Taking into account the difference between
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
tweets and prices, we should pay attention to the effects of both when choosing a fusion method,
and use the quantitative analysis of experimental results.
To effectively solve the above problems, we propose a collaborative attention (co-attention) Trans-
former approach adaptive to financial market forecasting called CAFF, partially inspired by the re-
cent proposed multimodal fusion in bidirectional encoder representation from Transformers (BERT),
which was originally developed to utilize Transformer to realize the feature interaction between text
and image data (Lu et al., 2019). To verify the rationality of the CAFF method, we included the
existing traditional multimodal fusion methods in the experiments for comparison.
In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows:
•	To the best of our knowledge, this work is among the first to introduce a co-attention Trans-
former fusion approach adaptive to financial market forecasting, which is inspired by the
multimodal fusion method and takes into account the characteristics of financial data.
•	We propose a novel financial market forecasting framework based on the idea of deep fu-
sion to model multisource data analysis. The components of the framework work together
to extract tweets and price features in parallel, fuse the features and realize accurate predic-
tion.
•	Experimental results on stock market forecasting tasks demonstrate that our proposed
method achieves a substantial gain over state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, the results
also reveal that under the CAFF fusion framework, the quantitative analysis results show
that social media information has played a relatively more critical role.
2	Related work
Some researchers have adopted the method of fusing real market prices and textual information
reflecting investor sentiment from social media. In this section, we review the work related to
financial market forecasting that fuse prices and text.
A variety of analysis approaches based on text and prices to market forecasting have been proposed
in the research literature. For example, Xu & Cohen (2018) proposed a new depth generation model
for the stock market forecasting task, which combines text and price signals as the source infor-
mation. Similarly, Li et al. (2020) also used the concatenation method to integrate the sentiment
information contained in the news data and stock prices to predict the Hong Kong stock market. In
addition, Xu et al. (2020) proposed a stock movement prediction network based on tweet and stock
prices by means of incorporative attention mechanism that combines local and context attention
mechanisms through incorporative attention to clean up context embedding using local semantics.
The approach also makes use of concatenation. It can be seen that the common fusion methods in
the field of financial market prediction are still surface feature fusion without parameter interaction.
At present, the mainstream fusion technology in the field of CV has attracted our attention, such as
bilinear pooling, attention-based fusion, in which bilinear pooling creates a joint representation s-
pace by calculating the outer product to facilitate the multiplicative interaction between all elements
in the two vectors, which is obviously not suitable for describing text and representing the value
of price changes. Lu et al. (2019) proposed the visual language BERT (ViLBERT) model, which
extends the Transformer to the fusion operation of processing images and texts. These extracted
features can interact through a parallel attention layer, which provides a creative way for feature op-
timization, but we have to consider the differences between financial data and CV, speech task and
other fields. Therefore, developing a method suitable for financial data with the help of the existing
fusion methods is a problem worthy of discussion.
In summary, using an improved deep learning framework based on a fusion algorithm to analyze fi-
nancial data to achieve financial market forecasting appears to be effective, which can be confirmed
via quantitative analysis. On the basis of the above advanced theoretical analysis, our research mo-
tivations are as follows. First, we believe that a framework that processes text and prices in parallel
and fully fuses them would perform better than a single data source, where the fusion algorithm
plays a key role. However, referring to the existing fusion methods in the CV field, the most natural
and effective way to process prices may be to consider the original form as 1-D data rather than as a
2-D matrix image Gupta et al. (2020). Moreover, the role of text used to describe the movement of
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
financial market is inconsistent with prices, which are different from the text and image in the cross-
modal task of CV fields. The above problems require an applicable prediction framework based on
the fusion method to realize the feature extraction and fusion of tweets and prices with temporal-
ity, as well as a matching activation function. Hence, we propose a new framework called CAFF,
which uses the Transformer model adapted to financial data and a variety of attention mechanisms
to collaboratively predict the movement on the target trading day.
3	Model overview
We propose CAFF, which conforms to the characteristics of financial data, and the complete frame-
work is shown in Figure 1. The upper of the model deeply extracts text features to learn the text
representation of tweets, and the lowers extracts market price features in parallel. The operation
with Transformer as the main structure in the middle is used to fuse tweets and price information,
and the right side is used to process the merged features and realize the prediction of market trends
on the target trading day.
3.1	The proposed model: CAFF
Considering that there is a certain lag in the target trading day d, we are allowed to simulate and
predict other trading days close to d in principle. We can not only predict the trend of the target
trading day itself, but also the trend of other trading days during the lag period. For example, if we
choose 08/06/2021 as the target trading day, then 03/07/2021 and 07/06/2021 represent the endpoints
of the lag period (the lag period is usually 5 days); thus, we capture the relationships between the
predictions mainly within this sample range. However, considering the actual conditions of the
financial market, we neglected nontrading days in the calculation process to achieve the effect of
effectively organizing and utilizing input data. In general, we can predict a series of movements
z = [z1, z2, . . . , zT], where the target trading day is zT and the rest are auxiliaries.
3.1.1	Input Representation
Next, we introduce the processing of text and stock prices to obtain the input representation. Text
data is regarded as a feature extraction task in NLP domain. Considering the inherent correlation
and volatility, we adopt a relatively direct method to deal with stock prices to maintain the original
structure.
Figure 1: The overall architecture of the proposed stock movement prediction model CAFF.
Tweet-level Model: Generally, tweets posted on social platforms for a given stock often contain
multiple inconsistent items on a given trading day. To learn more profitable and valuable informa-
tion from a large number of investor tweets, we adopt the Bi-LSTM and self-attention to obtain
the representation as the input of the fusion component. For each sentence ti , we adopt the pre-
trained word embedding (GloVe) to project each word tag onto the d - dimensional space and the
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
pretrained word embedding as the input of Bi-LSTM.
ft	=σ(Wf ∙ [ht-i,xt] + bf)	(1)
it	=σ(Wi ∙ [ht-i,xt] + bi)	(2)
Cet =	tanh(Wc ∙ [ht-i,xt]+ be)	(3)
(	一 一一 ≈, Jt = ft * Ct-1 + it * Ct	(4)
Ot	=σ(Wo ∙ [ht-i,xt] + bo)	(5)
	ht = Ot * tanh(Ct)	(6)
	h = [→, h-]	(7)
In accordance with the nature of time series data, we use an RNN with Bi-LSTM units and a self-
attention mechanism to recursively extract features. The design characteristics of LSTM allow it
to model text data (e.g., tweet data, news data) to extract text features and capture the context rela-
tionship. Bi-LSTM adds a process of forward and backward concatenation of hidden vectors on the
basis of the realization ofLSTM. Formulas (1-7) describe the details of Bi-LSTM.
The essence of the attention function can be described as a query (q) to a series of key-value (k-v)
mappings. In current research, the k and v are often the same, that is, key = value. Formulas (8-
10) describe the details of the attention operations. The only difference between the self-attention
mechanism and the abovementioned conventional attention mechanism is that q = k. Self-attention
mechanisms have become a hot topic in recent research and have been explored in different tasks.
The main reason we choose the self-attention mechanism after Bi-LSTM is that the self-attention is
calculated for each word and all words, so regardless of the distance between them, long-distance
dependency relationships can be captured to achieve the contextual interaction of tweets to obtain
key text features.
αi = sof tmax(F (keyi, q))	(8)
att((K, V),q) = σiN=1αiXi
attention((K, V), Q) = att((K, V), qι)㊉.…㊉
att((K, V), qM)
(9)
(10)
Price-level Model: Stock prices more intuitively reflect the real market conditions, while tweets
contain objective investor attitudes, which allows the two to complement each other. However, the
movement of stock has random volatility and is determined by continuous changes in prices rather
than the absolute values of the opening and closing prices. Thus, the original stock price vector
of trading day d is not fed directly into the neural network; we employ a normalization strategy to
obtain an adjusted closing price. The price adjustment formula is shown below:
pd = [pcd,pdh,pld]
(11)
pa
pd
-------1
pd-ι
(12)
where pcd, pdh and pld denote the closing price, highest price and lowest price vectors, respectively.
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
3.1.2	Fusion Method Based on Co-attention Transformer
Due to the excellent performance, an increasing number of Transformer-based frameworks have
been proposed to improve various tasks. The input is divided into three parts, which is similar to
the self-attention mechanism we mentioned above. In fact, Transformer is composed mainly of the
attention mechanisms, where the multihead attention mechanism is the parallel of multiple atten-
tion mechanisms, allowing the model to pay attention to information from different representation
subspaces at different locations. The follow-up is to input the result of the Add & Norm into the
feedforward neural network (FNN) in the fully connected layer.
We improve the fusion method upon this framework to accommodate financial data. Next, we elab-
orate the complete fusion process in detail. To achieve deep interaction, we first create the q, k and
v vector; that is, the input representations generated by text embedding and stock price are repre-
sented and the Query (Q), Key (K) and Value (V) matrices are generated by multiplying the input
representations and the three generated matrices in the training process. Moreover, the conversion
process adopts the GELU activation function, which introduces the idea of random regularization.
This approach represent a more intuitive and natural understanding of the probability description of
the neuron input, which matches a random value of 0 or 1 for the input. Furthermore, some exper-
iments have shown that GELU is better than ReLU and ELU in CV, NLP, and speech tasks. The
approximate expression of the GELU is as follows:
Gelu(X) = 0.5x(1 + tanh(p2∕π(x + 0.044715x3)))	(13)
Scaled dot-product attention is the main component of the multihead attention mechanism, so its
calculation process is equivalent to reducing the entire implementation. First, We need to calculate
the dot product between Q and K to measure the similarity and then divide the value by √dk to
prevent the result from being excessively large, Where dq and dk are the dimensions of the vectors.
Then, the result is normalized to a probability distribution via the softmax function and multiplied
by matrix V to obtain the attention vector. The matrix of outputs is as follows:
QKT
Atention(Q,K,V) = Softmax(—^^)V	(14)
dk
The above calculation process mentions only single-layer attention, while multihead attention is
used for parallel calculations. Then, all the values are concatenated to reduce the loss by decreasing
the dimensionality. Therefore, we linearly project the queries in different ways with the keys and
values h times to learn the linear projections ofdq, dk and dv . Next, we apply the attention function
in parallel on each of these queries, keys and values to generate dv - dimensional output values.
The above single values are concatenated in series and projected to form the final required value. By
means of the above process, multihead attention allows the model to jointly focus on information
from different locations to achieve deep interaction of internal information. The multihead attention
function is as follows:
M ultiH ead(Q, K, V) = C oncat(head1, head2, . . . , headh)WO	(15)
where W O represents the weight matrix. In this work, we employ h = 5 parallel attention layers or
heads.
Add & Norm denote residual connection and layer normalization, where residual connection has
a better effect on deeper neural networks. When the network layer is very deep, the spread of
values decreases with the weight. Layer normalization prevents abnormal values due to excessively
large or small positions in a certain layer and is applied in training problems when returning the
gradient of the neural network to ensure the stability of training. Add & Norm are applied after
each subnetwork to make the deep neural network training smoother. Each submodel in the encoder
contains a fully connected FNN layer that acts equally on each position. The layer is composed of
two linear transformations separated by GELU activation.
FFN =max(0,xW1 +b1)W2+b2	(16)
Although the linear transformation operations used at all positions are the same, exclusive optimal
parameters are used between layers.
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
3.1.3	Joint feature processing: LSTM
The first step of LSTM is to determine that unnecessary information should be discarded from the
cell state, which is realized by the sigmoid layer called the ”forgetting door”. This layer considers
ht-1 (previous output) and xt (current input) and outputs a value between 0 and 1 for each number
in the cell state Ct-1 (previous state). The next step is to determine the information to store in
the unit state and to output the information to complete the operation. Formulas (1-6) describe the
details of these LSTM operations.
LSTM substantially improves the use of RNN, and the emergence of attention models has led to
great progress. Therefore, we further analyze the joint information through temporal attention to
achieve the prediction task.
3.1.4	Joint feature processing: Temporal attention
We introduce an improved temporal attention mechanism to realize stock prediction on the target
trading day and auxiliary trading days. Although different types of temporal attention mechanisms
have been proposed, we need a method that is compatible with text and stock price data, that is, a
method that accounts for the relationship and key information of both types of data. To this end,
as shown in the complete CAFF framework, the temporal attention mechanism is composed of two
main parts, namely, the dependency score and information score, which are, respectively, used to
obtain the dependency of stock data and more favorable key information.
dt = tanh(Wd[x, ht] + bd)	(17)
where Wd and bd denote the weight matrix and bias, respectively. Then, the dependency score and
information score are obtained by nonlinear projection of dt, and the calculation method is shown
in formulas (18-20).
vi0 = wiT tanh(Wd,iD)	(18)
vm0 = dTT tanh(Wd,mD)	(19)
v = sof tmax(vi0	vm0 )	(20)
where Wd,i and Wd,m are weight parameters and D is the set of all auxiliary trading days. Our
goal is to predict the movement on the target trading day, so dT is	used	as the	final information. To
achieve the final prediction,	the softmax function is used to obtain	the	Up or	Down prediction for
the target trading day.
zt = sof tmax(wy dt + by), t < T	(21)
zT = sof tmax(wT [ZvT, dT] + bT)	(22)
where wy and wT are weight parameters and by and bT are biases. The above calculation steps can
achieve a complete prediction of stock market movement on the target trading day.
4	Experiments and discussions
4.1	Dataset
To verify the actual performance of CAFF and related methods of stock prediction, we adopt stock
price and tweets datasets. Stock traders often post personal opinions on social platforms such as
Twitter to express their inner practical ideas. On the basis of the heat of discussion, the 88 stocks
with the highest capital scale rankings were selected for comparison experiments.
Some stocks show only minimal rates of change, so we implement relevant measures to avoid affect-
ing the experimental results. We chose the upper and lower limits of stock price changes proposed
by Hu et al. (2018) for stock trend prediction. Since the stock movement prediction task can be
regarded as a binary classification problem, we set two thresholds: -0.5% and 0.55%. For samples
with movement ratios of ≤ -0.55% and >0.55%, 0 and 1 were used to represent the fall and rise,
respectively, and 38.72% of the target is removed between the two thresholds. According to the two
thresholds set above to balance the two predicted categories, 26614 prediction targets are obtained
for the entire dataset, of which the two categories account for 49.78% and 50.22%, respectively. We
divide the dataset into three parts, namely, the training set, test set and validation set, by date.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Table 1: Performance of baseline methods and CAFF in ACC and MCC.
Model
Accuracy (%) MCC
ARIMA (Adebiyi et al., 2014)	51.39	-0.0205
TSLDA (Nguyen & Shirai, 2015)	54.07	0.0653
HAN (Hu et al., 2018)	57.14	0.0723
CH-RNN (Wu et al., 2018)	59.15	0.0945
StockNet (Xu & Cohen, 2018)	58.23	0.0807
Adv-LSTM (Feng et al., 2019)	57.20	0.1483
CapTE (Liu et al., 2019)	64.22	0.3481
SMPN (XU et al., 2020)	59.74	0.1586
CAFF. CON	60.19	0.2436
CAFF. SUM	59.64	0.1589
CAFF. BIL	58.49	0.1377
CAFF. TRA	57.47	0.1163
CAFF (W/O text)	55.48	0.1657
CAFF (W/O price)	64.89	0.3288
CAFF (lagsize-7)	63.77	0.3109
CAFF (lagsize.10)	62.50	0.2258
	CAFF	65.78	0.3792
4.2	Training setup
Regarding the specific parameter settings of the experiment, the most basic operation is to obtain the
initial word embedding of the text through the GloVe pretraining model, and the word embedding
size is 50. The maximum numbers of messages and words in a single message are set to 30 and 40,
respectively. The traditional Adam optimizer is more in line with the framework of this paper and is
used to train the model with an initial learning rate of 0.001. In addition, the decay rate is set to 0.96,
and the decay step is set to 100. We adopt conventional batch operations during the training process,
and the batch size is 32. The whole method is implemented using TensorFlow (version 1.14.0).
4.3	Evaluation metrics
The model predicts the upward or downward movement of stocks for the next day. In this work,
we follow some previous research work to evaluate stock prediction (Xie et al., 2013), and standard
metrics, including accuracy (ACC) and the matthews correlation coefficient (MCC), are used as
performance evaluation indicators. The MCC is essentially the correlation coefficient between the
observed and predicted binary classes. As shown in formula (23), tp, fp, tn and fn represent the
numbers of samples classified as true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives,
respectively. The MCC is calculated as follows:
MCC
tp × tn - fp × fn
vz(tP-+fP)(tP-+fn)(tn+fP)(tn+fn)
(23)
4.4	Verifying the effectiveness of CAFF
4.4.1	Comparison with baseline models
To test the diversity and differences of different model architectures, we consider 8 baseline models
to compare the performance of the prediction results. The baseline models are designed from the
perspective of overall achievement to predict stock movements and are composed of common neural
networks, using text or stock prices as input data.
Table 1 shows that the CAFF model achieves the best performance, where numbers in bold font rep-
resent the best performance score. An accuracy of 56% is generally considered to be a satisfactory
result of binary stock movement prediction (Nguyen & Shirai, 2015). In fact, according to statistical
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
laws, the probability of binary random prediction is 50%. Although the ARIMA and TSLDA meth-
ods in Table 1 have accuracies less than 56%, the statistical models and the deep learning framework
based on social media based on these methods are still relatively satisfactory.
In the stage of text feature extraction, both HAN and CH-RNN use a traditional attention mecha-
nism, while CapTE is used in Transformer, which has achieved breakthrough results in NLP and
is the main factor leading to the difference in the final experimental results. In addition, CapTE
chose the capsule network commonly used in NLP cross-domain direction after processing the text
features, which provides researchers with an efficient way to handle temporal text. Adv-LSTM used
stock prices as the original analysis data, but the experimental results show that there is room for
further improvement. The main reason for this phenomenon may be the range of features covered
by the text and price, which may also be affected by the complete framework. The remaining two
deep learning frameworks, StockNet and SMPN, both adopt the idea of fusing text and stock prices
with the attention mechanism as the main body and adopt the traditional fusion method of concate-
nation. However, from a quantitative perspective, their results are similar but worse than those of
CAFF. Therefore, it is effective for us to use a suitable fusion method and an adaptive deep learning
framework for stock price prediction tasks.
4.4.2	Comparison with fusion methods
This subsection provides four solutions that fuse text and stock prices and searches for the best so-
lution to achieve state-of-the-art performance. The four fusion methods are concatenation, weighted
summation, bilinear pooling, and Transformer, which changes the input order to quantitatively an-
alyze the fusion method that is most suitable for text and stock data under the current framework,
called CAFF. CON, CAFF. SUM, CAFF. BIL, CAFF. TRA respectively.
We can conclude that the fusion operation can be used to quantitatively determine which method
is more suitable for CAFF and judge the criticality of the source input data. Concatenation and
weighted summation are the most classic algorithms for fusing different modes of information, and
many studies have shown that they are effective to a certain extent. Especially in the field of stock
market forecasting, concatenation is currently the most commonly used fusion method. According
to the quantitative results, CAFF. CON and CAFF. SUM have achieved satisfactory results, even
compared with the baseline model in the previous subsection. Bilinear pooling is a feature fusion
algorithm for CV proposed in recent years; a large number of researchers continue to improve the
method to obtain breakthrough results. However, bilinear pooling does not appear to be suitable
for financial data with timeliness. The main reason may be that the extracted features are subjected
to the outer product operation during fusion and the dimensionality is forced to be reduced, which
causes feature loss. Finally, the Transformer-based fusion algorithm that reverses the input order has
the worst performance, further confirming that the text and stock price have different effects on the
final forecast results and that the text plays a key role.
4.4.3	Ablation study
To verify the integrity of our CAFF model and make a more detailed analysis of the key compo-
nents, we construct the following variants in addition to the fully equipped CAFF. CAFF (W/O text)
means that the input data do not include the text corpus; that is, only the historical stock prices are
considered, and CAFF (W/O price) has a similar meaning. Furthermore, we propose variables with
alternative parameter values in which the length of the lag time is modified to 7 days and 10 days;
these methods are called CAFF (lagsizeJ7) and CAFF (lag_size_10), respectively.
Table 1 shows the performance of CAFF and different variants. CAFF (W/O text) performs the
worst, indicating that stock movement is affected by many unfixed factors. Even compared with the
baseline model in Table 1, the performance of CAFF (W/O text) is not satisfactory, which proves
that historical stock prices play an auxiliary role in the prediction framework. However, CAFF (W/O
price) has produced extremely competitive results, which quantitatively confirms the criticality of
the text. Therefore, social media contains a lot of valuable market information, and studies have
shown that this type of information is useful for predicting stock prices and for other financial tasks
(Diaz et al., 2020).
In the ablation study, we additionally modified the lag period of the input data from the current 5
calendar days to 7 days and 10 days. As shown in Table 1, experiments with a lag period of 7
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Table 2: Profits comparison between CAFF and CapTE.
Stock	CAFF	Return(%)	CapTE	Return(%)	Stock	CAFF	Return(%)	CapTE	Return(%)
AAPL	$1287	12.87	$1196	11.96	GOOG	$1003	10.03	$864	8.64
ABBV	$910	9.1	$729	7.29	INTC	$1847	18.47	$1200	12
BAC	$993	9.93	$941	9.41	ORCL	$985	9.85	$703	7.03
CELG	$1567	15.67	$1430	14.30	PFE	$1100	11	$1053	10.53
CVX	$1059	10.59	$1005	10.05	WMT	$1572	15.72	$1473	14.73
DIS	$892	8.92	$703	7.03	XOM	$1190	11.9	$1092	10.92
and 10 calendar days did not produce better results than experiments with a lag period of 5. The
reasons for this phenomenon are as follows: tweets and historical stock prices are time-sensitive,
and the information utilization value is lower farther from the target trading day; moreover, investor
comments are more inclined to reflect current market conditions and are not suitable for predicting
long-term trading behavior.
4.5	Market trading simulation
The stock simulation strategy proposed by Ding et al. (2015) to evaluate the performance is used of
the CAFF method, which simulates the behavior of a daily trader who uses our model in a simple
way. CAFF is compared with the best-performing CapTE to illustrate the potential value of our
method. The detailed simulation strategy is implemented as follows: if the model indicates that the
price of a single stock will rise the next day, the trader will invest $10,000 worth of that stock at
the opening price. After the purchase, the length of time the trader holds the stock is determined by
the actual market changes. If the stock can earn a profit of 2% or more in the next period of time,
the trader immediately sells it; otherwise, traders sell the stock at the closing price at the end of the
day. In addition, if the model indicates that the price of a single stock will fall, the same strategy
can be used to short the stock. If the trader can buy the stock at a price that is 1% lower than the
short-selling price, the trader will buy the stock to cover the position; otherwise, the trader buys the
corresponding stock at the closing price.
In Table 2, we selected 12 representative stocks in 22 trading days (30 calendar days) to illustrate
the specific profits of the two models, with the maximum return exceeding 20%. The experimental
results consistently illustrate that CAFF can obtain higher profits than CapTE and has a superior
practical application value. In addition to the reasons analyzed in Section 4.4, we note that if there
is no financial data on the stock market the previous day, the two models cannot predict the stock
price trend for the day because they have no information for quantitative analysis. Not only will this
scenario reduce the accuracy and MCC, it will also harm actual profits. Furthermore, we take the
specific market returns at that time as the benchmark, and the returns of the two models are generally
higher than the average returns of the actual market. The monthly return of the historical real stock
market is 8.35 %, and the average market return obtained by CAFF is 9.3 %.
5	Conclusion and future work
We study a popular research topic in current financial market, that is, how to fuse market prices and
text information, and quantitatively analyze the key role of source information to enable the pre-
dictive model to process different financial data in parallel in an intelligent manner. To solve these
problems, we proposed a collaborative attention Transformer fusion model to perform financial mar-
ket forecasting using historical text and prices. The proposed method is inspired by the cross-modal
fusion method and accounts for the characteristics of financial data. According to the quantitative
analysis results from the above experiments, text play a key role in the overall framework and are es-
sential to improving the experimental accuracy. Therefore, advanced NLP technology must be used
to process text and analyze context relations. How to choose a method that is suitable for analyzing
time series information and has practical application value will be addressed in future research.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Ethics S tatement
Studies that doesn’t involve human subjects, practices to data set releases, potentially harmful in-
sights, methodologies and applications, pontential conflicts of interest and sponsorship, discrimi-
nation/bias/fairness concerns, privacy and security issues, legal compliance, and research integrity
issues.
Reproducibility
The dataset is available on github:https://github.com/yumoxu/stocknet-dataset.
References
Ayodele A. Adebiyi, Aderemi O. Adewumi, and Charles K. Ayo. Stock price prediction using the
ARIMA model. In Proceedings of the 2014 UKSim-AMSS 16th International Conference on
ComPuterModelling and Simulation,pp.106-112. IEEE, 2014. ISBN 9781479949236.
Tadas Baltrusaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis Philippe Morency. Multimodal Machine Learning:
A Survey and Taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41
(2):423443,2019. ISSN 19393539.
Juglar Diaz, Barbara Poblete, and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. An integrated model for textual social
media data with spatio-temporal dimensions. Information Processing and Management, 57(5):
102219, 2020. ISSN 03064573.
Xiao Ding, Yue Zhang, Liu Ting, and Duan Junwen. Deep Learning for Event-Driven Stock Predic-
tion. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI2015),pp. 2327-2333. Morgan Kaufmann, 2015.
Eugene F. Fama. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The Journal of
Finance, 25(2):383-417, 1970.
Fuli Feng, Huimin Chen, Xiangnan He, Ji Ding, Maosong Sun, and Tat Seng Chua. Enhancing stock
movement prediction with adversarial training. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-19), pp. 5843-5849. Morgan Kaufmann, 2019.
ISBN 9780999241141.
Pooja Gupta, Angshul Majumdar, Emilie Chouzenoux, and Giovanni Chierchia. SuperDeConFuse:
A supervised deep convolutional transform based fusion framework for financial trading systems.
ExPert Systems with APPlications, 169:114206, 2020. ISSN 09574174.
Ziniu Hu, Weiqing Liu, Jiang Bian, Xuanzhe Liu, and Tie Yan Liu. Listening to chaotic whispers:
A deep learning framework for news-oriented Stock trend prediction. In Proceedings of the 11th
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM 2018), pp. 261-269.
ACM, 2018. ISBN 9781450355810.
Jin Hwa Kim, Kyoung Woon On, Woosang Lim, Jeonghee Kim, Jung Woo Ha, and Byoung Tak
Zhang. Hadamard product for low-rank bilinear pooling. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Learning RePresentations (ICLR 2017), pp. 1-14, 2017.
Xiaodong Li, Pangjing Wu, and Wenpeng Wang. Incorporating stock prices and news sentiments
for stock market prediction: A case of Hong Kong. Information Processing and Management, 57
(5):102212, 2020. ISSN 03064573.
Jintao Liu, Xikai Liu, Hongfei Lin, Bo Xu, Yuqi Ren, Yufeng Diao, and Liang Yang. Transformer-
Based Capsule Network For Stock Movements Prediction. In Proceedings of the First WorkshoP
on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing (FinNLP@IJCAI 2019), pp. 66-73.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2019.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. ViLBERT: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolin-
guistic representations for vision-and-language tasks. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), pp. 1-11. MIT Press, 2019.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Pan Lu, Hongsheng Li, Wei Zhang, Jianyong Wang, and Xiaogang Wang. Co-attending free-form
regions and detections with multi-modal multiplicative feature embedding for visual question
answering. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7218-
7225. AAAI, 2018. ISBN 9781577358008.
Thien Hai Nguyen and Kiyoaki Shirai. Topic modeling based sentiment analysis on social medi-
a for stock market prediction. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, pp. 1354-1364. ACL, 2015. ISBN 9781941643723.
Juan Manuel Perez-Rua, Valentin Vielzeuf, Stephane Pateux, Moez Baccouche, and Frederic Jurie.
MFAS: Multimodal fusion architecture search. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6959-6968. IEEE, 2019. ISBN
9781728132938.
Huizhe Wu, Wei Zhang, Weiwei Shen, and Jun Wang. Hybrid Deep Sequential Modeling for So-
cial Text-Driven Stock Prediction. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM’ 18), pp. 1627-1630. ACM, 2018. ISBN
9781450360142.
Boyi Xie, Rebecca J. Passonneau, Leon Wu, and German G. Creamer. Semantic frames to pre-
dict stock price movement. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 873-883. ACL, 2013. ISBN 9781937284503.
Hongfeng Xu, Lei Chai, Zhiming Luo, and Shaozi Li. Stock movement predictive network via
incorporative attention mechanisms based on tweet and historical prices. Neurocomputing, 418:
326-339, 2020. ISSN 18728286.
Nan Xu, Wenji Mao, and Guandan Chen. Multi-interactive memory network for aspect based mul-
timodal sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-19), pp. 371-378. AAAI, 2019. ISBN 9781577358091.
Yumo Xu and Shay B. Cohen. Stock movement prediction from tweets and historical prices. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
1970-1979. ACL, 2018. ISBN 9781948087322.
11