Figure 1: 1-D Encoding Scheme: On the left we show the Forward Transform. T representsthe transform matrix that takes the input X into an intermediate coordinate system, resulting inrepresentation Y. On the right, we show the Inverse Transform that uses Y to reconstruct X overtime. Here T -1 = T0. The input image X is reconstructed progressively at each timestep bysumming the basis vectors Tn modulated by the corresponding coefficient yn over all previoustimesteps. Since there are 5 bases shown here, X requires 5 timesteps for reconstruction.
Figure 2: Spike generation with 1-D DCTbasis functions input per timestep (shownvertically). The neuron spikes when theaccumulated value crosses a threshold.
Figure 3: 8 × 8 2-D DCT bases on the left and PCAbases for CIFAR-10 on the right. The DCT basesare ranked in a zig-zag fashion starting from top leftto the bottom right and the PCA bases are ranked insignificance from left to right and top to bottom.
Figure 4: ACCUracy(%) for VGG9 on CIFAR10with varying DCT blocksize (timesteps)Figure 5: ACCuraCy(%) for VGG9 on CIFAR10with varying timestepstimesteps required in parenthesis are shown in Fig. 4. We empiriCally find that DCT-2 is unableto Converge, and that overlapped version of DCT-4 with a stride of 2 outperforms all other Cases.
Figure 5: ACCuraCy(%) for VGG9 on CIFAR10with varying timestepstimesteps required in parenthesis are shown in Fig. 4. We empiriCally find that DCT-2 is unableto Converge, and that overlapped version of DCT-4 with a stride of 2 outperforms all other Cases.
Figure 6: Accuracy-latency tradeoff duringinference; VGG9 trained on CIFAR-10 withall 16 frequencies for 48 timesteps. Duringinference, cycle1 uses all 16 frequencies, cycle2uses limited, ordered frequencies.
Figure 8: Training Accuracy with Limited Frequencies.
Figure 9: Accuracy versus Latency curve for various coding schemes, the values for TTFS (Parket al., 2020), Phase (Kim et al., 2018), Burst (Park et al., 2019) and rate (Rueckauer et al., 2017)have been adopted from Park et al. (2020).
