Figure 1: Architectural overview for 3 acquisition steps of A-DPS, with extensions of DPS shownin red.
Figure 2:	Results for the MNIST experiment. a) Classification accuracy on the test set for differentsampling ratios. Confidence bounds of one standard deviation are shown. The ‘all samples’ lineindicates the accuracy achieved without subsampling. b) Comparison of the sampling masks for twoexamples at r = 4%. The colors denote (for A-DPS) the order in which the samples were taken.
Figure 3:	a) Classification accuracy on the test set for different sampling ratios for A-DPS and anablated version of A-DPS where the LSTM has been replaced by a fully connected layer. Confidencebounds of one standard deviation over 5 runs are shown. b) A t-SNE plot of the sampling patterns -colored by digit - shows that A-DPS actively generates different sampling masks for different digitsTo analyze the sampling patterns created by A-DPS we create a t-SNE plot (Van Der Maaten &Hinton, 2008), which maps the created sampling pattern (for r = 4%) per image in the test set toone dot in a 2D space. In this 2D space t-SNE aims to preserve spatial relationships from the higherdimension, i.e. similar high dimensional vectors get mapped close to together, while dissimilar onesare mapped further apart. The resulting plot is shown in Fig. 3b, where each dot is colored withthe ground truth label (digit) of the corresponding image. The clustering in this figure indicates howsimilar selected sampling patterns are. For example, the sampling patterns for digit zero tend to bedissimilar from all the other sampling patterns, while the digits four, six, and nine are sampled moresimilarly using A-DPS.
Figure 4:	A t-SNE plot of the generated context vector by A-DPS, for all images in the test set. Thiscontext vector changes every time a new sample is acquired. This change is visualized by labelingeach dot with the number of samples acquired so far (a), showing that context vectors become moredistinct after acquiring more data. (b): The same plot, but now colored by the ground truth label(digit).
Figure 5: A-DPS MR image reconstruction of a test-set image by adaptively sampling 26 k-spacelines. From left to right: 1) k-space with the first 3 sampled lines, 2) sequence of line indices selectedby A-DPS, 3) reconstructed image, 4) fully sampled MR image (ground truth).
Figure 6: Analysis of A-DPS for MRI. a) Relative occurrence of the line indices. b) t-SNE analysison the context vector that is updated every acquisition step. The coloring corresponds to the currentacquisition step, which is equal to the number of sampled k-space lines.
Figure 7: Comparison betWeen DPS and A-DPS of time taken to train for one epoch for the MNISTexample on a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti.
