Figure 1: The first row illustrates that, as the dimension of the space increases, the relative volume insidea partition compared to the volume outside of the partition decreases. When the dimension increases from 1through 3, the relative volume of red partition decreases as 1/3, 1/9 and 1/27, respectively. The second rowillustrates that the HMC samples are concentrated in the region that maximizes probability mass. Here P(s),sMode and ds represent probability density, mode of the distribution and volume, respectively.
Figure 2: Figure 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamil-tonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively. Figure 2(d) provides a comparison forconvergence of Q function with Hamiltonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling.
Figure 3: Mean square error Vs number of samples of Q function With exhaustive sampling and HamiltonianQ-Learning for vanila Q-Learning, DQN, Dueling DQN and DDPG.
Figure 4: Mean square error vs number of samples of Q function with exhaustive sampling and HamiltonianQ-Learning for vanila Q-Learning, DQN, Dueling DQN and DDPG.
Figure 5: Figure 5(a), 5(b) and 5(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamil-tonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling respectively. Figure 5(d) provides a comparison forconvergence of Q function with Hamiltonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling.
Figure 6:	Figure 6(a), 6(b) and 6(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamilto-nian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
Figure 7:	Figure 7(a), 7(b) and 7(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamilto-nian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
Figure 8: Figure 8(a), 8(b) and 8(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamilto-nian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
Figure 9: Figure 9(a), 9(b) and 9(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling, Hamilto-nian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
Figure 10:	Figure 10(a), 10(b) and 10(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling,Hamiltonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
Figure 11:	Figure 11(a), 11(b) and 11(c) show policy heat maps for Q-Learning with exhaustive sampling,Hamiltonian Q-Learning and Q-Learning with IID sampling, respectively.
