Figure 1: For a daily snapshot of a temporal social network, symmetric NMF is able to extractmeaningful factor representations of the individuals. Colors represent the interaction frequencies ofall individuals (a). The age-based division of labor in a honey bee colony is clearly reflected in thetwo factors - same-aged individuals are likely to interact with each other (b). For long observationwindows spanning several weeks, the social network changes drastically as individuals are born,die, and switch tasks (c). Here, we investigate how a representation of temporal networks can beextracted, such that the factors representing individuals can be meaningfully compared over time, andeven across datasets.
Figure 2: Overview of the method: We learn a parametric function describing the mean life trajectorym(c(t, i)) and a set of basis functions of individual variation b(c(t, i)), where c(t, i) is the age ofindividual i at time t (a). For each individual, an embedding is learned consisting of one scalar perbasis function that scales the contribution of the respective basis function - this vector of weightsmakes up the individuality embedding of an individual (b). The mean trajectory m(c(t, i)) plus aweighted sum of the basis functions b(c(t, i)) constitute the lifetime trajectory of each individual (c).
Figure 3: AMI score and mean squared error between true factors and the best permutation of learnedfactors for increasing noise levels. The median values over 128 trial runs are shown.
Figure 4: Left: Mean lifetime trajectories according to m(c(t, i)). The model learns a sparserepresentation of the functional position of the individuals in the social network. f0 (blue) mostlycorresponds to middle-aged and older bees, and f1 (orange) predominantly describes young bees.
Figure 5: a) Magnitude of factor offsets for the five most common individuality basis functions overage bk(c(t, i)). The percentage of individuals that most strongly correspond to the individual basisfunctions is shown in the column titles. More than 60% of the individuals strongly correspond toone of the five basis functions shown here. b) Because the basis functions describe individualityoffsets from the mean lifetime trajectory, it may be easier to interpret them by visualizing individualexamples. For each of the basis functions (top row), we show a lifetime trajectory of an individualthat corresponds to that basis function (bottom row). Note that individuals can die or disappear at anytime (solid lines). The mean lifetime trajectories are shown as dotted lines in the background.
Figure 6: Left: Hierarchical clustering of individuality embeddings: Most individuals stronglycorrespond to a single individuality basis function, making it easy to cluster their lifetime socialbehavior (i.e. each individual has a high value in a single dimension for their individuality embedding).
