Figure 1: Privacy concerns in MRI scans and methods to prevent identification. (left) Detailed3D renderings of human heads with identifiable features can be crafted from MRI scans and usedto identify patients (Mazura et al., 2012). (center) Existing de-identification approaches attemptto remove privacy-sensitive parts of the head, but alter the structure and appearance and often failto reliably mask the patient’s identity. (right) We remodel privacy-sensitive facial structures whileleaving the brain untouched using a conditional multi-scale volumetric GAN.
Figure 2: Overview of our approach: We apply model-agnostic preprocessing to standardize thescans and construct a surface representation using a novel technique. We then extract a convex hullc(x), a brain mask b(x), and the original brain intensities b(x) ◦ x, stacked to form the privacytransform γ(x) which serves as a conditioning variable at various scales for the generator and dis-criminator of our model C-DeID-GAN. It learns to convert the distribution PX of original MR scans to ade-identified counterpart PY , and because γ(x) does not contain any privacy-sensitive information,renderings from the synthesized volumes are guaranteed not to reveal a patient’s identity.
Figure 3: Study on De-Identification Quality: (left) Amazon Mechanical Turk workers were askedto defeat the de-identification methods: We show the original rendering and 5 renderings of differentpatients, the task is to select the de-identified rendering matching the query. Here, ADNI patients de-identified using C-DeID-GAN are shown, “5” is correct. (right) Correct identification rates (±s.d.) for800 distinct questions per dataset, evenly distributed among the methods. Each question was givento five workers, totalling 4,000 assignments (random guessing = 20%).
Figure 4: Effect of De-Identification on Brain Segmentation and Age Estimation: (a) We comparehow de-identification affects the reliability of segmenting various brain regions: grey matter, whitematter, VCSF, and total brain. The box plots show the S0rensen-Dice coefficient computed betweensegmentations on the original scan and the de-identified scan using standard software, SIENAX.
Figure 5: Manipulating the Appearance of the Synthesis: We demonstrate how our model can controlthe appearance of the synthesized volume by manipulating the privacy transform γ(x) which C-DeID-GAN is conditioned on (top three rows). Here, we apply a simple resizing using a scale factor α ∈[0.85, 1.15] prior to presenting it to C-DeID-GAN. Synthesized volumes (bottom row) are appropriatelysized and appear realistic, implying that more sophisticated manipulations may be possible.
