Figure 1: ECG recordings reflect both temporal and spatial information. This is because they measurethe electrical activity of the heart using different leads (views) over time. Temporal Invariance.
Figure 2: Similarity matrix for a mini-batch of K instances in (Left) Contrastive Multi-segmentCoding, (Centre) Contrastive Multi-lead Coding, and (Right) Contrastive Multi-segment Multi-lead Coding. Additional matrices would be generated based on all pairs of applied transformationoperators, TA and TB . Exemplar transformed ECG instances are illustrated along the edges. Toidentify positive pairs, we associate each instance with its patient ID. By design, diagonal elements(green) correspond to the same patient, contributing to Eq. 2. Similarly, instances 1 and 50 (yellow)belong to the same patient, contributing to Eq. 3. The blue area corresponds to negative examples asthey pertain to instances from different patients.
Figure 3: Effect of single (blue) and sequential (green) perturbations applied to the (top) SimCLR and(bottom) CMSC implementations on linear evaluation. Sequential perturbations involve a Gaussianperturbation followed by one of the remaining four types. Pre-training and evaluation was performedon PhysioNet 2020 using 4 leads. Evaluation was performed at F = 0.5 and results are averagedacross 5 seeds. We show that CMSC outperforms SimCLR regardless of the applied perturbation.
Figure 4: Validation AUC of a network initialized randomly or via CMSC and which is exposedto different amounts of labelled training data, F . Results are averaged across 5 seeds. Shaded arearepresents one standard deviation.
Figure 5: Effect of (a) embedding dimension, E, and (b) labelled fraction, F , on the test AUC whenpre-training on Chapman and fine-tuning on Cardiology. Results are averaged across 5 seeds. Errorbars represent one standard deviation.
Figure 6: Distribution of pairwise Euclidean distance between representations (E = 128) belongingto the same patient (Intra-Patient) and those belonging to different patients (Inter-Patient). Self-supervision was performed on PhysioNet 2020. Notice the lower average intra-patient distance andimproved separability between the two distributions with CMSC than with SimCLR.
