Figure 1: Monotonicity score on familiar functions. Panels (a) and (b) show how both y = exp(X)and y = - exp(X) are assigned the same monitonicity value. Panel (c), (d) and (e) show howincreasing the Gaussian noise on top of y = -1 x, decreases the monotonicity of the dependency.
Figure 2: Metrics score versus accuracy. We plot log(1 - score), to better display the distribution of points, against the final accuracy of a given architecture.
Figure 3: Best accuracy retrieved by each metric and evaluation time per architecture. Onthe left, we performed all our scores on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, and we plot theaccuracy after training of the architecture with the highest score. The vertical colored bar representsthe mean best accuracy found over 5 runs of 1000 samples, and the black line represents the standarddeviation. The dark red horizontal line on top shows the highest accuracy in the NAS-Bench-201dataset. Cosine similarity based scores perform similarly to eigenvalue-based similarity scores.
Figure 4: Monotonicity of each score with respect to the accuracy. On the left, evaluated on 1000randomly drawn architectures from the NAS-Bench-201, on the right evaluated on the architecturesabove the median score. Even if the quality of the monotonicity is high for JS when considering the1000 architectures, the decrease in monotonic quality is more pronounced for higher values of theJS score than for most of the other scores. Parameter space metrics seem to resist better.
Figure 5: Slope of each score with respect to the accuracy. On the left, the slope of the linearapproximation of the log(1 - score) against accuracy dependency of 1000 architectures sampledfrom the NAS-Bench-201 dataset. On the right the slope of the linear regression performed onthe architectures with a score above the median. The absolute value of the slope is shown to easethe comparison with monotonicity. The slope of JS dependency decreases drastically, while metricssuch as LS, SS, WPJS and WPJSI keep a consistent slope in both scenarios. A desirable property fora score is that a consistent slope should be maintained throughout its range, without drastic changesfor different percentiles, to ease its usability.
