Figure 1: Our model is composed by a prob-abilistic model and the probability of improv-ing over the threshold fγ, i.e., right tail of theGaussian. The black curve is the probabilisticmodel’s mean and the shaded area is the model’svariance.
Figure 2: PrBO on the 1D Branin function. The leftmost column shows the exponential prior.
Figure 3: Regret of prior sam-pling and PrBO with different Figure 4: Log regret comparison of PrBO with and without priors,priors (μ ± σ on 5 reps.). RS, and Spearmint (mean +/- one std on 5 repetitions). We run thebenchmarks for 100D iterations, capped at 300.
Figure 5: Log regret comparison of RS, HyperMapper, PrBO, and manual optimization on Spatial.
Figure 6: Breakdown of the prior Pg(x) = B(3, 3), the model Mg(x), and the pseudo-posteriorg(x) (top row) for the 1-dimensional Branin function (bottom row) and their evolution over theoptimization iterations. Two random points from the prior are sampled to initialize the GP model(bottom row) before starting PrBO. The blue/green crosses denote PrBO samples, with green samplesdenoting later iterations. The blue line and shaded area show the mean and uncertainty of the GPmodel.
Figure 7: PrBO on the 1D Branin function with a decay prior. The leftmost column shows the logpseudo-posterior before any samples are evaluated, in this case, the pseudo-posterior is equal to thedecay prior. The other columns show the model and pseudo-posterior after 0 (only random samples),10, and 20 BO iterations. 2 random samples are used to initialize the GP model.
Figure 8: PrBO on the Branin function with exponential priors for both dimensions. (a) shows thelog pseudo-posterior before any samples are evaluated, in this case, the pseudo-posterior is equal tothe prior; the green crosses are the optima. (b) shows the result of optimization after 3 initializationsamples drawn from the prior at random and 50 BO iterations. The dots in (b) show the pointsexplored by PrBO, with greener points denoting later iterations. The colored heatmap shows the logof the pseudo-posterior g(x).
Figure 9: Log regret comparison of PrBO with and without priors, 10, 000× RS, and Spearmint(mean +/- one std on 5 repetitions). We run the benchmark for 200 iterations.
Figure 10: Log regret comparison of PrBO with multivariate and univariate KDE priors. The lineand shaded regions show the mean and standard deviation of the log simple regret after 5 runs. Allmethods were initialized with D + 1 random samples, where D is the number of input dimensions,indicated by the vertical dashed line. We run the benchmarks for 100D iterations, capped at 300.
Figure 11: Log regret comparison of PrBO with varying prior quality. The line and shaded regionsshow the mean and standard deviation of the log simple regret after 5 runs. All methods wereinitialized with D + 1 random samples, where D is the number of input dimensions, indicated by thevertical dashed line. We run the benchmarks for 100D iterations, capped at 300.
Figure 12: Log regret comparison of PrBO, SMAC, and TPE. The line and shaded regions show themean and standard deviation of the log simple regret after 5 runs. PrBO was initialized with D + 1random samples, where D is the number of input dimensions, indicated by the vertical dashed line.
Figure 13: Log regret comparison of PrBO, Spearmint with prior initialization, and Spearmint withdefault initialization. The line and shaded regions show the mean and standard deviation of the logsimple regret after 5 runs. PrBO and Spearmint Prior were initialized with D + 1 random samplesfrom the prior, where D is the number of input dimensions, indicated by the vertical dashed line. Werun the benchmarks for 100D iterations, capped at 300.
Figure 14: Log regret comparison of PrBO, HyperMapper with prior initialization, and HyperMapperwith default initialization. The line and shaded regions show the mean and standard deviation of thelog simple regret after 5 runs. PrBO and HyperMapper Prior were initialized with D + 1 randomsamples from the prior, where D is the number of input dimensions, indicated by the vertical dashedline.
Figure 15: Simple regret of sampling from the prior with different priors for our synthetic benchmarks.
Figure 16: Simple regret of PrBO with different priors for our synthetic benchmarks. We provide5 repetitions for each experiment and mean +/- one std error bars. A more informative prior givesbetter results in all benchmarks.
Figure 17:	Log simple regret comparison between PrBO and sampling from the prior. The shadedlines are mean +/- one std error. PrBO was initialized with D + 1 random samples, indicated by thevertical dashed line.
Figure 18:	Comparison of PrBO with a weak KDE prior and different values for the γ hyperparameteron our four synthetic benchmarks. We run PrBO with a budget of 10D function evaluations, includingD + 1 randomly sampled DoE configurations.
Figure 19: Comparison of PrBO with a weak KDE prior and different values for the β hyperparameteron our four synthetic benchmarks. We run PrBO with a budget of 10D function evaluations, includingD + 1 randomly sampled DoE configurations.
