Figure 1: (a) is a schematic of the EPSWAE architecture. The red arrows indicate calculation of theloss terms. The prior-encoder generates a prior in latent space. (b) is simple example of a shapewhere interpolating between points A and B ‘through the manifold, (red dashed line through pointC) is desired, since linear interpolation (black line) leads out of the concave hull.
Figure 2: (a) side view and (b) top view of samples of the prior (green) and posterior (blue) in 3Dlatent space generated by EPSWAE after 100 epochs on the high dimensional input. The red lineshows the interpolation along network-geodesics between two prior samples. The brown line showsthe trajectory of linear interpolation between two points on the spiral.
Figure 3: Images generated after 100 epochs from prior samples in (a) EPSWAE (b) BaselineSWAE at increasing standard deviations σ, i.e., progressively more ‘outlying’.
Figure 4: (a) Comparison of linear Vs geodesic interpolation using EPSWAE. The top row of eachrow-pair is linear, and the bottom is geodesic-interpolation. (b) Randomly chosen instances forgeodesic interpolations for MNIST and CelebA. The first and last images are reconstructions ofreal data, and the interpolations traverse through samples of the prior using the network-geodesicalgorithm. A total of 400 samples are used in all cases.
Figure 5: Comparisons of the EPSWAE model with different loss terms. ToP panels present topviews, and bottom panels present the corresponding side views. The red curves show interpola-tion between two randomly selected samples using the network-geodesic algorithm. All figures aregenerated after 100 epochs with a lr=0.01, and batch size =100. kι = I,k2 = 2.
Figure 6: Comparison of EPSWAE With baselines SWAE (Kolouri et al., 2018a) and VAE (Kingma& Welling, 2014). All figures are generated after 100 epochs with a lr=0.01, and batch size =100.
Figure 7:	Loss as a function of training epochs for linear SW, cubic nonlinearity, quintic nonlinearityand our (sine-shear) NSW distance. A full set of cubic and quintic functions terms are consideredfor computing the generalized Radon transform in the SW distance. L = 5 nonlinear transformswith M = 50 linear 1D projections each taken for all cases.
Figure 8:	Comparison between (a) EPSWAE (b) SWAE and (c) VAE for generation on MNIST. forall three, batch size = 200, epochs=100, lr = 0.001, for EPSWAE kι = 2, kι = 1, α = 1,β =0.1,κ = 0.001.
Figure 9: Images generated from prior samples in (a) EPsWAE (b) Baseline sWAE. Batch size =200, epochs=100, lr = 0.001. α = 500, β = 50,κ = 0.05.
Figure 10: Additional CelebA interpolations. The first and last images are reconstructions of realdata, and the interpolations traverse through samples of the prior using the network-geodesic algo-rithm. (a) Top three panels show interpolations for energy parameter h = 1, and (b) bottom threepanels show interpolations for energy parameter h = 2. Latent space is 128 dimensional. Hyper-parameters are the same as those used in the paper. A total of a 400 samples in latent space areused.
Figure 11: Comparisons of linear interpolation between EpSWAE and SWAE. The first and lastimages are reconstructions of randomly picked real data (a) shows long interpolation (over twolines), (b,c) show shorter interpolations. Hyperparameters are the same as those used in the paper.
