Figure 1: The 1st column shows the image of Santa Claus xin and the scatter plot of zin using bluedots. The 2nd column shows a chest x-ray image xout and the scatter plot of zout (red circles) andzin (blue). The 3rd column shows a random image xout, and the scatter plot of zout (red) and zin(blue).
Figure 2: The 1st column shows three in-distribution samples (e.g. Santa Claus) xin , and thecorresponding scatter plots of zin (blue dots). The 2nd column shows OOD samples xout generatedfrom a CT image x0out , and the corresponding scatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). The 3rdcolumn shows OOD samples xout generated from a random image x0out , and the correspondingscatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). The 4th column shows OOD samples xout generated froma x-ray image x0out , and the corresponding scatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). MAPE valuesare embedded in these scatter-plots. Please zoom-in for better visualization.
Figure 3: Left: the MAPE histogram using a chest x-ray as the initial OOD sample. Middle: theMAPE histogram using a lung CT image as the initial OOD sample. Right: the MAPE histogramusing a random-noise image as the initial OOD sample. The results are from Resnet-18.
Figure 7: The 1st column shows in-distribution samples xin in the OCT dataset, and the scatterplots of zin (blue dots). The 2nd column shows OOD samples xout generated from a retinal fundusphotography image x0out , and the scatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). The 3rd column showsOOD samples xout generated from a random image x0out , and the scatter plots of zout (red) and zin(blue). MAPE values are embedded in these scatter-plots. Please zoom-in for better visualization.
Figure 8: Left: MAPE histogram using a retinal fundus photography image as the initial OODsample. Right: MAPE histogram using a random-noise image as the initial OOD sample. Pleasezoom-in for better visualization.
Figure 9: Left: MAPE histogram using chest x-ray image as the initial OOD sample. Right:MAPE histogram using a random-noise image as the initial OOD sample. Please zoom-in for bettervisualization.
Figure 10: The 1st column shows in-distribution samples xin in the COVID-19 dataset, and thescatter plots of zin (blue dots). The 2nd column shows OOD samples xout generated from a chestx-ray image x0out , and the scatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). The 3rd column shows OODsamples xout generated from a random image x0out , and the scatter plots of zout (red) and zin (blue).
Figure 11: Left: MAPE histogram. Right: zoom-in view of the histogram(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 12: The 1st row shows four traffic sign images. The 3rd row shows the generated OOD im-ages. The 2nd row shows the scatter-plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). MAPE values are embeddedin these scatter-plots. Please zoom-in for better visualization.
Figure 12: The 1st row shows four traffic sign images. The 3rd row shows the generated OOD im-ages. The 2nd row shows the scatter-plots of zout (red) and zin (blue). MAPE values are embeddedin these scatter-plots. Please zoom-in for better visualization.
Figure 13: the OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples whenT=1000 and PM=0.001D AppendixWe applied our OOD Attack algorithm to test the OOD detection method named Mahalanobis (Leeet al., 2018b).
Figure 14: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples. Thein-distribution dataset is CIFAR10, PM=0.01, and f (x) = OOD score of x.
Figure 15: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples. Thein-distribution dataset is CIFAR10, PM=0.01, and f (x) = feature concatenation.
Figure 16: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples. Thein-distribution dataset is CIFAR10.
Figure 17: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples.
Figure 18: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples. Thein-distribution dataset is CIFAR10.
Figure 19: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples. Thein-distribution dataset is CIFAR10.
Figure 20: The OOD score histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) samples.
Figure 21: The OOD score (logp(x) histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red) sam-ples.
Figure 22: The OOD score (maxyP (y∣x)) histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red)samples.
Figure 23: The OOD score (-|| dlo∂X⑺ l∣2) histograms of the in-distribution (blue) and OOD (red)samples.
Figure 24: An example of the loss curve from the OOD Attack algorithm.
Figure 25: Examples of the generated images.
