Figure 1: Samples of generated web pages from selected websites taken from different snapshots of thetraining (a-c) and unseen test “Login” website (d). Over time, the number of pages in a website decreases butthe density of elements in a page increases with more task-oriented elements. See Appendix A.11 for moresamples.
Figure 2: An example underspecified DOM tree template (a) and its instantiations (b,c) with differentvalues. (*) indicates a variable; either an element or one of its attributes. (c) is used in Page 1 and(b) is used in Page 2 in Figure 3.
Figure 3: A sample rollout of the adversary for compositional environment generation for web navigationproblem. An initial observation (Obs) is given at the beginning of the rollout. f0, fK, fL, fP , and fI denotenetworks for encoding initial observation, generating number of pages, page indices,1 primitives, and encodingLSTM inputs, respectively.
Figure 4: Comparison of PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020) and Flexible PAIRED with and without budget en-forcing; averaged over 4 difficulty levels. (f): Percentage of active primitives over training steps (see AppendixA.4 for more details).
Figure 5: Aggregated task success rate comparison of Flexible b-PAIRED and baseline models on test envi-ronments with increasing difficulty levels. See Appendix A.6 for detailed results.
Figure 6: Training workflow. The adversary unrolls an environment, adding one element at thetime of each page. That environment is passed on a population of navigation agents under training.
Figure 7: Histograms of primitives from early, middle, and late snapshots of the training.
Figure 8: Frequencies of active and passive primitives during training.
Figure 9: Aggregated task success rate comparison of Flexible b-PAIRED trained with different α weights.
Figure 10:	Screenshots of single page test environments.
Figure 11:	Screenshots of multi-page “Shopping” environment. The “Shopping” environment iscomposed of a complex home page and additional “Login” and “Enter Address” pages.
Figure 12: Screenshots of sample pages generated by the adversary.
Figure 13: Each box corresponds to a dense layer with the shape of the corresponding linear trans-formation matrix. Each dense layer also includes a bias vector with the same size as the columns ofthe corresponding matrices.
