Figure 1: System Overviewif chosen wisely, these vortices will be able to fully describe the dynamics of the original vorticityfield. Since the n × m grid will be of size around 40000 and the number of vortices k will typicallybe less than 50, this precedure drastically reduces the simulation dimensionality. To view it anotherway, we have created a physically-valid latent space for the dynamic simualtion to be performed on.
Figure 3: Three-Stage Training SchemeWith that as our premise, we create the separa-ble dataset in which we no only have the initialand evolved field, but also the ground truth ofwhere the initial vortices are, as shown in Fig-ure. 2. This enables us to pre-train the Dis-cretization Net and the Reconstruction Net inStage 1 as shown in Figure. 3 using the separa-ble data. Once we obtain the trained Discretiza-tion Net, we are able to train the Dynamics Net.
Figure 4: The architecture of the discretization. It takes the vorticity field as input and output the po-sition and vortex volume for each vortex detected. The Conv means the Conv2d-BatchNorm-ReLUcombo and the ResBlock is the same as in (16). In each ResBlock, we use stride 2 to downsamplethe feature map. The number in the parenthesis is the output dimension.
Figure 5: The architecture of the dynamics network. It takes the particles attribution as input andoutput the position for each vortex. The ResBlock has the same architecture as in (16) with theconvolution layers replaced by linear layers. The number in the parenthesis is the output dimension.
Figure 7: Vorticity field predicted using 4 vortices under the initial condition of leapfrogging vortexrings at t = 0, t = 11, t = 22, and t = 33. Vortices are indicated by the white-black circles. Forbetter visualization, we use 80000 tracers.
Figure 6: Two-dimensional Lagrangian scalarfields at t = 1 with the initial condition φ = x andresolution 20002 . The evolution of the two La-∂φ + u ∙ vφ = 0.
Figure 8: Prediction results using VortexNet for three cases with (a) f = 0, (b) f = 0.05ω(1, 0),and (c) f = 0.02ω(cos(x - xc), - sin(y - yc)). The black arrows indicate the directions of themotions of the 2 vortices. ω represents the vorticity, and (xc , yc) is the center of the computationdomain.
Figure 9: Comparison with end-to-end trained U-Net. Left: the L2 error of vorticity field predictiondocumented over 300 test trials. Middle: the aggregate L1 vorticity error field over the trials forU-Net. Middle: the aggregate L1 vorticity error field over the trials for VortexNet. Darker colorrepresents higher prediction error.
Figure 10: Comparison of VortexNet and conventional Vortex Method for solving Euler equationin the periodic box. (a) VortexNet, (b) conventional Vortex Method, and (c) The relative error ofvelocity in flow simulation. The red dots indicate the positions of 2 vortices at different time stepsgenerated by DNS, and the black-circles in (a) and (b) are the prediction results of VortexNet andconventional Vortex Method, respectively. The black arrows indicate the directions of the motionsof the 2 vortices.
