Figure 1: Schema of our model structure. The CT scan of one patient is converted to a densely connectedgraph. The GCN and the Distance Aware Pooling method are integrated to learn a graph-level representation.
Figure 2: The structure of the Distance Aware Pooling method with a numeric example. Four steps mentionedin the above figures are node clustering, clustering ranking, selecting cluster centers, and center node featurepooling, which correspond to those mentioned in Section 3.2.2. In this figure, the proposed center in the nodeclustering step is node v2 = 2, and the corresponding RFd neighborhood within hd = 0.5 are nodes 0, 2, and4. It should be noted that the proposed center may not be the final center for this cluster. The cluster score αiof each cluster with proposed center vi = i can be calculated. With αi , the top k proportion clusters could bedecided. In the selecting cluster centers step, b is the average of each row sum, and node v2 is still chosen asthe center with the least average distance value. In the center node feature pooling step, wr is the weight ofnodes derived from b. In this way, we can derive the weighted pooled center feature vector.
Figure 3: The confusion matrices for COVID-19 diagnosis and prognosis. ‘NCP’, ‘CP’, and ‘Normal’ indicateCOVID-19 positive patients, common pneumonia patients, and healthy individuals respectively. ‘Severe’ or‘Mild’ indicates whether a patient develops into severe/critical illness status. The severe/critical illness statusrefers to admission to the ICU, mechanical ventilation, or death.
Figure 4: The ROC urve and AUC for diagnosis. ‘NCP’, ‘CP’, and ‘Normal’ indicate COVID-19 positivepatients, common pneumonia patients, and healthy individuals respectively. The filled dots represent the per-formance on ‘NCP’ diagnosis of senior radiologists with 15 to 25 years of clinical experience (Zhang et al.,2020). It shows that our method is comparable to the senior radiologists.
Figure 5: Training curves of GCN diagnosis model using DAP versus three hierarchical pooling methods over20 runs, with varied random seeds and different train-validation-test split. The solid lines represent the meantraining loss and validation accuracy, and the shade visualizes the interval of one standard deviation. It showsthat DAP consistently outperforms ASAP and DiffPool across almost all runs, and converges much faster.
Figure 6: Visualisation of one-drop localization for a COVID-19 positive patient: The index at the bottom leftcorner of each slice refers to the slice index in the original CT scan. The slices with green stars at the top rightcorner are the slices containing lesions. The slices within the orange box are localized using the GCN diagnosismodel. The recall, precision, and IoU of localization for this patient is 80%, 100%, and 80%, respectively.
