Figure 1: Two illustrative cases of Language-mediated, Object-centric Representation Learning.
Figure 2: Our LORL contains four modules. (a) An image encoder encodes the input image into afactorized, object-centric representation. (b) An image decoder learns to reconstruct the image fromthe learned representations. It also decodes an objectness score based on the representation. (c) Apre-trained semantic parser translates the input sentence into an executable program and associatesconcepts with learnable vector embeddings. (d) A neuro-symbolic program executor takes the object-centric representation, the objectness scores, the parsed program, and concept embeddings as input topredict the answer (if the input is a question) or TRUE/FALSE (if the input is a descriptive sentence).
Figure 3: In Shop-VRB-Simple, questions involve seven different attributes of objects in the scene:name, size, weight, material, color, shape, mobility. In PartNet-Chairs, images are paired withsentences describing the names and colors of the parts in the scene, and their relationships.
Figure 4: Visualization on Shop-VRB-Simple. Pixels with the same color represent a mask producedby the models. The Slot Attention model often fails to segment blenders, coffee makers, and toasters.
Figure 5: Visualization on PartNet-Chairs. Pixels with the same color represent a mask produced bythe models. LORL successfully recognizes different parts in various situations.
Figure 6: A simple example on how GT/Pred Ratios are computedARI: 96.0Pred Split: 0.5GT Split: 0.0(b.1)(a.1)ARI: 70.7Pred Split: 0.0GT Split: 0.33(a.2)Figure 7: Comparison of ARI and GT/Pred Split Ratio on individual images. Pixels with the samecolor represent a mask produced by the models. We can see ARI is very sensitive to the size ofobjects, while Split Ratios capture object level failures where an object is split or multiple objects aremerged.
Figure 7: Comparison of ARI and GT/Pred Split Ratio on individual images. Pixels with the samecolor represent a mask produced by the models. We can see ARI is very sensitive to the size ofobjects, while Split Ratios capture object level failures where an object is split or multiple objects aremerged.
