Figure 1: An illustrative example of Ricci curvatureand Ricci flow on graphs. 1(a): The bridge edges (red)between communities have negative curvature whilethe edges inside communities (blue) have positive.
Figure 2: An overview of our Ricci-GNN. We firstcompute the Ricci flow metric from the input (at-tacked) graph and re-sample edges by using a Gaus-sian filter on each node. A newly sampled graph isused for the training phase in each iteration of a stan-dard GCN.
Figure 3: Changes in distance between all nodes and a fixed root in karate club graph for (a) Ricciflow metric, (b) spectral embedding, and (c) hop count, when two edges (shown in red) are removedfrom the network. Vertices are colored proportional to the magnitude of variations in distance.
Figure 4: The defense of meta-learning attack using Ricci-GNN on a Stochastic Block Model (SBM) graphwith 5 communities. 4(a): The clean SBM graph. 4(b): The adjacency matrix of the graph while the edges in theclean graph are shown in blue. Edges added by the meta-learning attack are shown in red. These edges appeardisproportionately to the original edge density. Sparser blocks in the clean graph receive more edges in theattack; nearly all edges in the attack are between different communities. 4(c): The heat map of the probabilityof an edge being connected in our re-structuring method. The probability of edges in the original communitystructure are higher than the attack edges. 4(d): The common edges of two randomly re-sampled graphs — theinfluence of the edges in the meta-learning attack is essentially eliminated.
Figure 5: Accuracy plot of different defense schemes with increasing perturbation rate under differentattacks on Polblogs.
Figure 6: Defense accuracy heat maps for synthetic data of 24 SBM graphs constructed from different{p, q}. From left to right: attacked graph, clean graph, defense result by our Ricci-GNN. For eachheat map, x-axis is the intra-community probability, p, y-axis is the inter-community probability, q.
