Figure 1: Phrase polarity score distribution for short phrases in binary SST. Left, GRU; right, LSTM.
Figure 2: Example of dissenting a sub-phrase. Polarity scores are listed for N -grams in the phrase“hardly an objective documentary”. Each vertical bar represents either a token or a sequence thatstarts from its left side and ends with its right side. Left, GRU; right, LSTM.
Figure 3: Distributions of polarity scores for negation N -grams (N = 1 - 8) in the phrase “not notnot not not good”. Each box represents a polarity score distribution for either the token “good” orthe i times negation N -grams (e.g., “3-not” refers to “not not not good”). Circles refer to outliers.
Figure 4: Polarity scores for N -grams (N = 1 - 5) in the phrase “freedom to feel contradictorythings” from bidrectional GRU cells. Left, forward cell; right, backward cell. Each bar represents aN -gram. Red refers to negative polarity scores while blue refers to positive ones.
Figure 5: Polarity scores for N -grams (N = 1 - 5) in the phrase “freedom to feel contradictorythings” from bidrectional LSTM cells. Each bar represents a N -gram. Red refers to negative polarityscores while blue refers to positive ones.
Figure 6: Polarity score distribution for the N -grams (N =1-4) that have strong association with aspecific label. Result from a GRU cell on the SST dataset.
Figure 7: Top, standard GRU Cell; bottom, approximate hidden state representation. From left toright: PTB, Wikitext-2, Wikitext-103. Training and validation losses for language modeling tasks.
Figure 8: Top, standard LSTM Cell; bottom, approximate hidden state representation. From left toright: PTB, Wikitext-2, Wikitext-103. Training and validation losses for language modeling tasks.
Figure 9: Distributions of polarity scores for negation N -grams (N = 1 - 6). Each box representsa polarity score distribution for either the token “good” or the i times negation N -grams (shown asi-not, i = 1, 2...5). Circles refer to outliers. Results from 30 trials with random initializations. AnLSTM cell is used.
Figure 10: Polarity scores for N -grams (N = 1 - 6) in “not not not not not good”. Left, GRU;right, LSTM. Each vertical bar represents the polarity score (token-level or sequence-level) for theN -gram that it covers. Red bars refer to negative polarity scores and blue bars refer to positivescores.
