Figure 1: The advantage of using a reference for phase retrieval at Np = 1 photon/pixel. Two algo-rithms, are applied to reconstruct from Fourier magnitude data of image alone and image+reference.
Figure 2: Holographic CDI schematic. The upper portion of the diffraction area contains the speci-men of interest X0 , and the adjacent portion consists of a known “reference” R0 . The recorded dataY has its low frequencies occluded by a beamstop. (Image courtesy of Saliba et al. (2012).)(b) The zero-padded data and itsmeasured Fourier magnitudes.
Figure 3: Reconstructed CAMERA by the various compared algorithms as a function of photoncount Np, with binary random reference and without beamstop. Images correspond to the best of 10runs in terms of residual error. See Figures 11, 12, and 14 in Appendix B for VIRUS, COIL1, andCOIL100 images.
Figure 4:	Reconstruction errors and residual errors for CAMERA (left two panels) and VIRUS(right two panels), as a function of the photon count Np with a binary random reference and withoutbeamstop. See Figures 13 in Appendix B for a similar figure for COIL1 and COIL100.
Figure 5:	Our methods and baselines evaluated as in Figure 4 on the COIL100 dataset.
Figure 6:	Reconstruction error on CAMERA as a function of beamstop area fraction. Errors anderror bars are computed as in Figure 4. The leftmost datapoints at a = 1e-6 correspond to nomissing data due to rounding, i.e. formally a = 0 at the leftmost points.
Figure 7: Reconstructed images as a function of beamstop area fraction a for fixed photon countNp = 1. Images correspond to the best of 10 runs in terms of residual error.
Figure 8: Reconstruction errors for decreasing photon counts Np with a 0.1m × 0.1m binaryrandom reference as a function of the relative separation. A separation of 0.5 implies that the left-most non-zero pixel of the reference is 0.5n pixels away form the image. Dashed lines correspondsto best run out of the 10 runs in terms of residual error.
Figure 9: Reconstructed images as a function of the relative separation as described in caption ofFigure 8. Images correspond to the best of 10 runs in terms of residual error.
Figure 10: Impact of depth of a deep decoder prior on the reconstruction illustrated on VIRUS. Left:Relative residual errors and reconstruction errors as a function of depth. Right: Best reconstructionout of 10 runs.
Figure 11: Same as Figure 3. Corresponding errors can be found in Figure 4IIolOpt P DDQ≡= dzQiI = dzGround TruthHIO-HoIo	Inverse Filt.	Wiener Filt.	HoIOPt-SHoIOPt-P	HolOpt-S-DDI==daQ≡=da0=0≡=daFigure 12: Same as Figure 3. Corresponding errors can be found in Figure 13HolOpt-P-DDFollowing these observations, we select the parameters of the deep decoders used in our experimentsaccording to the best visual outcomes. These parameters are gathered in Table 1, which also includesnumber of steps in the gradient descent. Some early stopping was found beneficial in order to avoidoverfitting at high noise levels. As a result we adapt the number of iterations to the photon count.
Figure 12: Same as Figure 3. Corresponding errors can be found in Figure 13HolOpt-P-DDFollowing these observations, we select the parameters of the deep decoders used in our experimentsaccording to the best visual outcomes. These parameters are gathered in Table 1, which also includesnumber of steps in the gradient descent. Some early stopping was found beneficial in order to avoidoverfitting at high noise levels. As a result we adapt the number of iterations to the photon count.
Figure 13: Same as Figure 4--*-' HIO-Holo--+-, Inverse Filt.
Figure 14: Representative reconstructed images from the COIL100 dataset. SameMean error over COIL100 dataset can be found in Figure 5.
Figure 15:	Reconstruction SSIM for CAMERA (left), VIRUS (center), and COIL (right) as afunction of the photon count Np with a binary random reference and without beamstop.
Figure 16:	Same as Figure 8 for CAMERA.
Figure 17: Same as Figure 9.
Figure 18:	Same as Figure 16, but for all test images and with SSIM rather than MSE.
Figure 19:	Same as Figure 16, but for all images in the COIL dataset and with both SSIM and MSE.
Figure 20: Examples of the measured magnitudes corresponding to varying beamstop area fractionsfor the CAMERA image with Np = 10.
Figure 21:	Reconstruction error on all three images (one per row, as indicated by the leftmost rowlevels) as a function of beamstop area fraction. Errors and error bars are computed as in Figure 4.
Figure 22:	SSIM on all three images (one per row, as indicated by the leftmost row levels) as afunction of beamstop area fraction. Errors and error bars are computed as in Figure 4. The leftmostdatapoints at a = 1e-6 correspond to no missing data due to rounding, i.e. formally a = 0 at theleftmost points.
Figure 23:	Reconstruction error on the full COIL dataset as a function of beamstop area fraction.
Figure 24: SSIM on the full COIL dataset as a function of beamstop area fraction. Errors anderror bars are computed over all 100 images, one trial each. The leftmost datapoints at a = 1e-6correspond to no missing data due to rounding, i.e. formally a = 0 at the leftmost points.
Figure 25: Reconstructed CAMERA image with varying beamstop at Np = 10 photons.
Figure 26: Reconstructed CAMERA image with varying beamstop at Np = 100 photons.
Figure 27: Reconstructed CAMERA image with varying beamstop at Np = 1000 photons.
Figure 28: Reconstructed COIL image with varying beamstop at NpJ--LU」3U3-M J--LU3s.l3>u-d,s0一。Ho-oɪ1o-ɪOQdJdOqH23Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021Figure 29: Reconstructed COIL image with varying beamstop at Np = 10 photons.
Figure 29: Reconstructed COIL image with varying beamstop at Np = 10 photons.
Figure 30: Reconstructed COIL image with varying beamstop at Np = 100 photons.
Figure 31: Reconstructed COIL image with varying beamstop at Np = 1000 photons.
Figure 32: Reconstructed VIRUS image with varying beamstop at Np = 1 photons.
Figure 33: Reconstructed VIRUS image with varying beamstop at Np = 10 photons.
Figure 34: Reconstructed VIRUS image with varying beamstop at Np = 100 photons.
Figure 35: Reconstructed VIRUS image with varying beamstop at Np = 1000 photons.
Figure 36: Reconstruction errors and SSIM for CAMERA, VIRUS and their averages over theCOIL100 dataset with varying oversampling factor at Np = 1 photon/pixel.
Figure 37: Reconstructed images for CAMERA, VIRUS and their averages over the COIL100dataset with varying oversampling factors (numbers above each column) at Np = 1 photon/pixel.
