Figure 2: Learning curves for ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 (n = 32). We compare tuned decentralized training (i.e.
Figure 1: The consensus distance Ξ forResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 (n=32) with ring.
Figure 3: Understanding the consensus av-eraging problem for different communica-tion topologies (n = 32). Results on differ-ent communication scales are deferred toAppendix C.1.
Figure 4: Learning curves for training Transformer on Multi30k (n = 32).
Figure 5: Justification for our multiple-phase experimental design choice (on ring graph). We run ResNet-20on CIFAR-10 (n=32) with the ring topology. We can observe the three quantities most relevant to optimizationall naturally form three phases, dictated by the learning rate schedule.
Figure 6: Justification for our multiple-phase experimental design choice (on complete graph). We runResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 (n=32) with the complete topology. We can again observe the three quantities mostrelevant to optimization all naturally form three phases, dictated by the learning rate schedule.
Figure 7: The convergence curves for the consensus averaging problem on different communication topologiesand different scales (i.e., n= 16, n=64 and n= 128). This figure complements the Figure 3 in the main text.
Figure 8: The spectral gap (in expectation) of differentcommunication topologies on different graph scales.
Figure 9: Target consensus distance v.s. the required communication rounds (Per gradient update step),for training ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 with different communication topologies. We focus on the setup ofdec-phase-1 and vary the target consensus distance for different communication topologies. Due to the changingconsensus distance over the training (of the interested phase-1), we consider the averaged consensus distance.
Figure 10: Learning curves for training the transformer model on the Multi30k dataset (n = 32). InFigure 10(b), we tune the the number of warmup steps as as way of tuning the learning rate, as the learning rateused in transformer training (Vaswani et al., 2017) is deterministically controlled by the model’s dimensionality,the current step index, and the number of warmup steps.
