Figure 1: The expected generalization error of the target task, EL Eout , with respect to the num-ber of free parameters (in the target task). The analytical values, induced from Theorem 3.1, arepresented using solid-line curves, and the respective empirical results obtained from averaging over250 experiments are denoted by circle markers. Each subfigure considers a different case of therelation (6) between the source and target tasks in the form of a different ση2 value, whereas H = Idfor all. Each curve color refer to a different number of transferred parameters.
Figure 2: Analytical evaluation of the expected generalization error of the target task, EL Eout ,with respect to the number of free parameters pe and p (in the source and target tasks, respectively).
Figure 3: The analytical values of ∆Etransfer defined in Theorem 3.1 for a random coordinate layout(namely, the expected error difference due to transfer of a parameter from the source to target task)as a function of pe and ση2 . The positive and negative values of ∆Etransfer appear in color scalesof red and blue, respectively. The regions of negative values correspond to beneficial transfer ofparameters. The positive values were truncated at 2 for the clarity of visualization. The solid blacklines denote the analytical thresholds for useful transfer learning as implied by Corollary 3.1. Eachsubfigure refers to another task relation model induced by H = 11d, H = Id, H = 3 Id.
Figure 4: Analytical (solid lines) and empirical (circle markers) values of Eo(uLt) for specific, non-random coordinate layouts. All subfigures use the same sequential evolution of L with p. Hereση2 = 0.5. See Figures 10-11 for the complete set of results.
Figure 5:	Analytical evaluation of the out-of-sample squared error of the target task, EL Eout ,with respect to the number of free parameters pe and p (in the source and target tasks, respectively).
Figure 6:	Empirical evaluation of the out-of-sample squared error of the target task, EL Eout ,with respect to the number of free parameters pe and p (in the source and target tasks, respectively).
Figure 7: The analytical and empirical values of ∆Etransfer defined in Theorem 3.1 (namely, theexpected error difference due to transfer of a parameter from the source to target task) as a func-tion of pe and ση2 . The positive and negative values of ∆Etransfer appear in color scales of red andblue, respectively. The regions of negative values (appear in shades of blue) correspond to beneficialtransfer of parameters. The positive values were truncated in the value of 2 for the clarity of visual-ization. The solid black lines (in all subfigures) denote the analytical thresholds for useful transferlearning as implied by Corollary 3.1. Each subfigure corresponds to a different task relation modelinduced by the definitions of H as H = 11d, H = Id, and H = 2Id. For all the subfigures, d = 80,e = 50, kβ∣∣2 = d, σξ = 0.025 ∙ d.
Figure 8: The analytical (top row of subfigures) and empirical (bottom row of subfigures) valuesof ∆Etransfer defined in Theorem 3.1 (namely, the expected error difference due to transfer of a pa-rameter from the source to target task) as a function of pe and ση2. The positive and negative valuesof ∆Etransfer appear in color scales of red and blue, respectively. The regions of negative values(appear in shades of blue) correspond to beneficial transfer of parameters. The positive values weretruncated in the value of 2 for the clarity of visualization. The solid black lines (in all subfigures)denote the analytical thresholds for useful transfer learning as implied by Corollary 3.1. Each col-umn of subfigures correspond to a different task relation model induced by the definitions of H asH = 2Id, H = Id, and H = 2Id. For all the subfigures, d = 80, e = 50, kβ∣∣2 = d, σξ = 0.025 ∙d.
Figure 9: The two types of true solution β used for the analytical and empirical evaluations.
Figure 10: Analytical (solid lines) and empirical (circle markers) values of Eo(uLt) for specific, non-random coordinate layouts. The true solution β has linearly-increasing values. All subfigures usethe same sequential evolution of L with p. Each subfigure considers a different case of the relation(6) between the source and target tasks: each column of subfigures has a different ση2 value, and eachrow of subfigures corresponds to a different linear operator H. The analytical values, induced fromTheorem 4.1, are presented using solid-line curves, and the respective empirical results obtainedfrom averaging over 750 experiments are denoted by circle markers. Each curve color refer to adifferent number of transferred parameters.
Figure 11: Analytical (solid lines) and empirical (circle markers) values of Eo(uLt) for specific, non-random coordinate layouts. The true solution β has a sparse form of values. All subfigures usethe same sequential evolution of L with p. Each subfigure considers a different case of the relation(6) between the source and target tasks: each column of subfigures has a different ση2 value, and eachrow of subfigures corresponds to a different linear operator H. The analytical values, induced fromTheorem 4.1, are presented using solid-line curves, and the respective empirical results obtainedfrom averaging over 750 experiments are denoted by circle markers. Each curve color refer to adifferent number of transferred parameters.
