Figure 1: Distribution of similarities between thesynthetically generated graphs.
Figure 2: Performance of the different approaches without node features. For GNNs, the differentcolors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean (•), and max (•). The horizontal linescorrespond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 3: Performance of the different approaches without node features. The GNNs were trainedon the IMDB-BINARY dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum(•), mean (•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 4: Performance of the different approaches with node features. For GNNs, the differentcolors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean (•), and max (•). The horizontal linescorrespond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 5: Performance of the different approaches with node features. The GNNs were trained onthe IMDB-BINARY dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•),mean (•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 6: Performance of 1-GNN with with respect to the different activation functions.
Figure 7: Performance of 1-GNN with with respect to the dimensionality of the hidden layers.
Figure 8: Performance of 1-GNN with with respect to the number of message passing layers.
Figure 9: Performance of 1-GNN with with respect to the different activation functions.
Figure 10: Performance of the different approaches without node features. The GNNs were trainedon the MUTAG dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean(•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 11: Performance of the different approaches without node features. The GNNs were trainedon the PTC-MR dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean(•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 12: Performance of the different approaches with node features. The GNNs were trained onthe MUTAG dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean(•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
Figure 13: Performance of the different approaches with node features. The GNNs were trained onthe PTC-MR dataset, and the different colors indicate the three pooling functions: sum (•), mean(•), and max (•). The horizontal lines correspond to the two baselines (random, constant).
