Figure 1: Loss comparison for data-free training of generative models for piecewise constant func-tions. For the loss L = kGθ(z) - h(Gθ(z))k22 where G and h are the generator and histogram layerrespectively, a blue plot uses both our forward and backward passes, while a red plot does not lever-age Jacobian information by using the straight-through estimator. We observe that using gradientinformation from the histogram layer enables improved optimization.
Figure 2: Results for 1D piecewise constant function generation. Generators updated with DPAlayer Jacobians generates smoother lines compared to generators trained with straight-through gra-dient backpropagation for the backward pass.
Figure 3: Results for data-free training of generative models for 1D piecewise linear functions.
Figure 4: Denoising results of 1D piecewise constant/linear signals. We observe that training DAEwith a regularizer with piecewise layer denoises the perturbed input signals better than vanilla DAE.
Figure 5: Segmentation results. The two models, Mbaseline and Mconn were trained with and withoutthe differentiable connected component layer respectively. Mreg minimizes the difference betweenthe network output and its piecewise approximation along with the standard segmentation error.
Figure 6: Test loss comparison between vanilla DAE and DAE with regularizer. Both methodsconverge to nearly equal losses. However, regularized DAE better enforces the piecewise prior interms of smoothness (fewer jagged or curved lines).
Figure 7: Generating Piecewise Constant Vectors. Data-free training of a neural network withthe backward pass from DPA layer allows us to generate smoother linear segments than without thebackward pass.
Figure 8: Generating Piecewise Linear Vectors. Data-free training of a neural network with thebackward pass from DPA layer allows us to generate smoother linear segments than without thebackward pass.
Figure 9: DAE on piecewise constant prior signals. Given perturbed signal (2nd column), eachrow demonstrates the visual comparison of denoised output between the vanilla DAE (3rd column)and DAEreg (4th column).
