Figure 1:	Overview of BO-based nested search for hardware/software co-design.
Figure 2:	Two architectures computing a 1D convolution.
Figure 3: Software mapping optimization on layer 2 of ResNet, DQN, MLP, and Transformer. They-axis shows the reciprocal of energy-delay product (EDP) (normalized against the best EDP value).
Figure 4: Hardware/software co-optimization. The x-axis shows the number of trials for hardwaresearch, and 250 attempts are made to find the optimal software mapping for each layer in the modelon the hardware specification. Best viewed in color.
Figure 5: (a): Comparison between the SOTA accelerator (Eyeriss) and searched design. Results areEDPs normalized to Eyeriss, and lower is better. (b)-(c): Ablation studies on ResNet-K4. Higherresults are better. (b) BO with different surrogate models and acquisition functions. (c) LCBacquisition function with different 位 values.
Figure 6:	Hardware parameters.
Figure 7:	Hardware constraints.
Figure 8:	Software parameters.
Figure 9: Software constraints.
Figure 10: Hyperparamters for BO.
Figure 11:	Specifications of ResNet (ResNet-18) (He et al., 2016) and DQN (Mnih et al., 2013)In Figure 20 we investigate the robustness of LCB for software optimization using different valuesof 位. We found that 位 = 0.1 tends to be too greedy, but that above 位 = 0.5, LCB tends to be fairlyrobust.
Figure 12:	Specifications of MLP and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)Model	Feature name	DescriptionHardware	mesh_x_ratio	The ratio of PE array and global buffer along x-axis	mesh_y_ratio	The ratio of PE array and global buffer along y-axisSoftware	input_buffer_usage	input data size / input (local) buffer size	Weight_buffer_usage	weight data size / input (local) buffer size	OUtPUt_buffer_usage	output data size / input (local) buffer size	globaLbUffer_usage	all data size/ global buffer size	parallelism_ratio_x	used parallelism / available parallelism in the x-axis of global buffer	parallelism_ratio_y	used parallelism / available parallelism in the y-axis of global bufferFigure 13:	Extra features used by the hardware and software BO optimizers.
Figure 13:	Extra features used by the hardware and software BO optimizers.
Figure 14:	Computing a 2D convolution with a seven-level nested loop.
Figure 15:	An architecture computing the CONV4 layer of ResNet.
Figure 16:	An example vector of hardware parameters. Please refer to Figure 6 for more detaileddescriptions.
Figure 17:	An example vector of software parameters (with ResNet-K2). Please refer to Figure 8for more detailed descriptions. In this example, parameters 1-17 correspond row-wise to S1-S6respectively, parameters 18-20 correspond to S7, and parameters 21 and 22 correspond to S8 and S9respectively.
Figure 18:	Software mapping optimization on ResNet, DQN, MLP, and Transformer. The Y-axisshows the reciprocal of energy-delay product (EDP) (normalized against the best EDP value). Higheris better.
Figure 19:	GP with different surrogate models and acquisition functions.
Figure 20:	LCB acquisition function with different lambda values.
