Figure 1: Our method takes a point cloud as in-put, encodes the points as random variables, andoutputs semantic class labels and instance labels.
Figure 2: Examples of (dis)similarity measuresContribution. Our main contributions are as follows1.	We propose to use probabilistic embeddings for instance segmentation and present a com-plete framework in the context of point cloud instance segmentation based on probabilisticembeddings.
Figure 3: Contour plot. Left: 1-D uncertainty similarity βi,j = ((σjσj + σj/σi) /2)-1/2. Thehighest value 1 is achieved when σi = σj . The value goes to 0 when one of the uncertainties issmall and the other is large. Right (4 figures): the similarity for different values of ∆μ (from leftto right, ∆μ = 1, 5,10, 25) in the case of 1-D probabilistic embedding. The similarity becomesβi,j eχp (-2 Oij), where δm = (pi- μj)2, αi,j = 4 (°^2 + σj).
Figure 4: Top row: ground-truth. Middle row: PartNet. Bottom row: Probabilistic Embedding.
Figure 5: Learned Uncertainties. Topleft: uncertainties are represented as ellipsoids,where directional scaling shows the value ofuncertainties along 3 axes. The other 3 subfig-ures: uncertainties along 3 axes. We representlarge values with red colors and smaller valueswith blue colors.
Figure 6: Comparison of embeddings. Toprow: Deterministic embedding. Bottom row:Probabilistic embedding. Left to right: weshow a gradual shape transformation betweenthe original point cloud and the embeddedpoint cloud.
Figure 7: Top row: similarity maps for each part instance Q[:, k]. Bottom row: probability mapQ[:, l]. The arrows show that information of instances of the same class is aggregated in Eq. 9. Redmeans high similarity, while blue means low.
Figure 8: Top row: ground-truth (background points are shown in transparent red). Second andthird row: PartNet and Ours (only true positives are shown, and false detections are shown intransparent red). Fourth and fifth row: PartNet and Ours (all detected instances, unclassifiedpoints are shown in transparent red). PartNet can group instance points together but fails to give thecorrect class labels in some cases (e.g., in the first and the third subfigures from left to right, pointsof table legs are grouped together (fourth row) but they are not true positives (second row). Besides,in the sixth subfigure from left to right, PartNet fails to distinguish different instances of lamp covers(second and fourth row). While our method performs especially better in these cases.
