Figure 1: Left: AUC score vs words modified for IMDB Reviews with CNN Right: IMDB Reviewwith LSTM5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20215.2	Sentiment Analysis: Yelp ReviewsThe Yelp reviews dataset consists of positive and negative reviews. We train a CNN with 32 inputunits, 32 filters and 64 hidden units with Relu activation. We use 83200 training example and 15000validation examples. The CNN has 89.96% train accuracy, 93.74% validation accuracy. We usethe Adam optmizer with default learning rate of 0.001 and use early stopping. The input layer usesword2vec embeddings that are learned during training. We carry out attacks on 500 random testexamples and report results in figure 2(left). Here we show the accuracy of the classifier on all 500examples as the number of perturbed features increases. Here We have added replace_random anddelete_random as two additional baselines. RePlace_random replaces k features chosen at random,whereas delete_random deletes k random features.
Figure 2: Left: Accuracy vs words modified for Yelp reviews with CNN Right: Accuracy vs wordsmodified for AG News with CNN5.4	Additional experiments on IMDB reviewsIn this section we describe a number of other experiments we ran on the IMDB reviews dataset.
Figure 3: Left: AUC scores for IMDB reviews with a small CNN Right: AUC scores for LSTM,with WordsWorth scores from a CNNThe Pearson correlation between WordsWorth scores for this model and our main CNN is 0.83.
Figure 4: WordsWorth scores for CNN on training vocabulary on IMDB reviewsphenomenon) with a reasonable success rate , and that the former explains the latter.
Figure 5: Overtraining CNN with IMDB Reviews. Top Left: After 4 epochs. Top Right: After 7epochs. Bottom Left: After 10 epochs. Bottom Right: After 13 epochs.
Figure 6: Left: scores for category World . Right: scores for category Business11Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021Figure 7: Left: Scores for category Sports. Right: Scores for category TechTable 2: Most important words for IMDB Reviews with CNN.
Figure 7: Left: Scores for category Sports. Right: Scores for category TechTable 2: Most important words for IMDB Reviews with CNN.
