Figure 1: (a) A simple infinite-horizon MDP where double Q-learning stated as Eq. (4) has multipleapproximated fixed points. Ri,j is a shorthand of R(si, aj). (b) The numerical solutions of the fixedpoints produced by double Q-learning in the MDP presented above. ∏ refers to Definition 3. (C) Therelation between the input state-value V (t)(s0) and the expected output state-value E[V (t+1)(s0)]generated by double Q-learning in the constructed MDP, in which we assume V (t) (s1) = 100.
Figure 3: Learning curves of DDQN with n-stepbootstrapping.
Figure 2: Learning curves on a suite of Atari benchmark tasks, in which the "+LB” version corre-sponds to the combination with the proposed lower bounded objective. All curves presented in thispaper are plotted from the median performance over 5 runs with random initialization. To make thecomparison more clear, the curves are smoothed by averaging 10 most recent checkpoints. Moreexperiment results are included in Appendix C.
Figure 4: Learning curves on a suite of stochastic Atari benchmark tasks with sticky actions, inwhich “ours” version corresponds to the combination of the proposed lower bounded objective withclipped double Q-learning and multi-step bootstrapping. "ours - LB" corresponds to the ablationstudy without the lower bounded objective. The curves of Rainbow, C51, and DQN are released byCastro et al. (2018) using the same environment setting.
Figure 5: (a) A simple MDP where clipped double Q-learning stated as Eq. (7) has multiple approx-imated fixed points. Ri,j is a shorthand ofR(si, aj). (b) The numerical solutions of the fixed pointsproduced by clipped double Q-learning in the MDP presented above. (c) The relation between theinput state-value V (t)(s0) and the expected output state-value E[V (t+1)(s0)] generated by clippeddouble Q-learning in the constructed MDP.
Figure 6: Learning curves on a suite of Atari benchmark tasks for comparing DDQN with or withoutlower bounded objective.
Figure 7: Learning curves on a suite of Atari benchmark tasks for comparing DDQN with n-stepbootstrapping and the proposed lower bounded objective.
