Figure 1: Effect of additional loss components:Loss-contours for the HNN-loss (6) (shown in gray)and the Poisson loss (7) (red) arising from the angu-lar momentum (k{L, H}k2) in the 2-body Hamilto-nian (10) with respect to two model parameters m1and m2 . The data model corresponds to m1 = m2 =g = 1 (indicated with a star) and we evaluate theloss over our training set. The analytic constraintm1 = m2 which arises from evaluating the Poissonbracket {L,H}〜(mi — m2) is clearly visible andprovides additional constraints on the model param-eter space.
Figure 2: Structure of symmetry control networks: The network Tψ transforms the inputcoordinates of phase space (p, q) to canonical coordinates where some coordinates are forcedto be cyclic. These coordinates are used as input to the Hamiltonian network Hφ. Theoutput, the time derivatives of our initial coordinates, is calculated from the Hamiltonianusing auto-differentiation.
Figure 3: Performance overview of the two-body and three-body experiments. Top lineincludes sample trajectories for the ground truth, the baseline neural network, a HNN, andour symmetry control networks. The colour coding is such that the same colour is usedthroughout all plots in this figure. The top line also shows the deviation of the predictedfrom the true trajectory. The solid line denotes the mean deviation over 50 trajectoriesand the one sigma band is shown shaded around it. Bottom two lines: We show meansquared deviation from conserved quantities where again we show the mean deviation over50 trajectories and and the associated one sigma band.
Figure 4: Comparing the test loss for HNN(blue), SCNN with one (red) and two (green)cyclic coordinates over the training time. Wecan see that too many conserved quantities leadto a dramatic drop in performance, while choos-ing the correct number of conserved quanti-ties results in a similar performance than theHNN. We averaged over 100 time steps to get asmooth curve.
Figure 5: Comparing the MSE depending on the degree of the used polynomials. We cansee a drastic drop of the error for a specific degree. When looking at the linear regressionprefactors, we can identify the conserved quantity. The only distinct behaviour of the MSEis for coordinate 3. Here, we are not able to find a suitable fit due to the problem, that weare not able to fit the Hamiltonian function for the 2-body-problem with polynomials.
