Figure 1: Ground truth, observed data and reconstruction by different approaches. (a) groundtruth (the first two latent variables) and the observed data (projection to two dimensions). Latentsamples from different Gaussian are dyed with different colors. (b) successful reconstruction of thelatent variables by augmenting along the first two dimensions. The spectrum is the sorted standarddeviations of the estimated variables (in black), while the spectrum of true latent variables is in grey.
Figure 2: Some interpretable factors of variation on EMNIST disentengled by our method.
Figure 3: Five samples and their augmented images by the three transformations. The firstrow shows the original images. The next three rows show the images augmented by horizontal andvertical translation, rotation and scaling, respectively.
Figure 4: Spectrum of sorted standard deviations from model initialized by identity transformationand the trained model. X-axis is sorted latent dimensions; y-axis is standard deviations in log scale.
Figure 5: Most significant latent variables 1-2. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
Figure 6: Most significant latent variables 3-6. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
Figure 7: Most significant latent variables 7-10. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
Figure 8: Most significant latent variables 11-14. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
Figure 9: Most significant latent variables 15-18. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
Figure 10: Most significant latent variables 19-20. Each row is generated by three steps: i) Samplesin EMNIST Digits testing set with corresponding label are encoded into estimated latent spaceby the trained model. ii) Each estimated latent variable is averaged. iii) Manipulate the chosenlatent variable on [-2, 2] and then decode the latent variables by the reverse trained model. Therightmost column show the areas affected by the chosen latent variable, computing by the absolutepixel difference on [-1, 1].
