Figure 1: Top: A subset of designs containing 3D CAD construction sequences from the Fusion360 Gallery reconstruction dataset. Bottom: An example construction sequence using sketch andextrude modeling operations.
Figure 2: An example design sequence from the Fusion 360 Gallery reconstruction dataset. Sketchprofiles are sequentially extruded to join (Extrude 1, Extrude 2) or cut (Extrude 3) geometry usingBoolean operations. The colored areas show the sketch profiles that partake in each extrusion.
Figure 3: The Fusion 360 Gym interacts with an agent in a sequential decision making scenario(left) with the state containing geometries represented as face adjacency graphs (right).
Figure 4:	Action representations supported by the Fusion 360 Gym include low-level sketch extru-sion (top) and simplified face extrusion (bottom).
Figure 5:	Given a state comprising the target geometry Gt and current geometry Gc, the agent usesa message passing network (MPN) to predict an action as a face extrusion modeling operation.
Figure 6: Reconstruction results over 100 search steps using random rollouts with different agents.
Figure 7: Reconstruction results over 100 search steps using random rollouts and gcn agents trainedon human-designed data (real), a mixture of human-designed and semi-synthetic data (aug), semi-synthetic data (semi-syn), and synthetic data (syn).
Figure 8: Example synthetic (left) and semi-synthetic data (right).
Figure 9: Qualitative construction sequence results comparing the ground truth (gt) to reconstruc-tions using different agents with random search.
Figure 10: An example multi-component assembly that is broken up into separate designs (high-lighted with color), each with an independent construction sequence.
Figure 11: A random sampling of designs from the Fusion 360 Gallery reconstruction dataset.
Figure 12: Left: The number of bodies per design shown as a distribution. Right: The number ofB-Rep faces per design shown as a distribution.
Figure 13: Left: The distribution of construction sequence length. Right: The distribution of com-mon construction sequences. S indicates a Sketch and E indicates an Extrude operation.
Figure 14: Sketch primitives.
Figure 15: Left: The number of curves in each design, shown as a distribution. Right: Commoncurve combinations in each design, shown as a distribution. Each curve type is abbreviated asfollows: C - SketchCircle, A - SketchArc, L - SketchLine, S - SketchFittedSpline.
Figure 16: The distribution of constraint (left) and dimension (right) types.
Figure 17:	An extrude can be expressed in several different ways: perpendicular from a sketch fora set distance along one side, a symmetrical distance along both sides, or separate distances alongtwo sides. Additionally the extrude can be tapered at an angle.
Figure 18:	Extrude operations include the ability to Boolean with other geometry. From the startingbody shown on the left, a sketch is extruded to form a new body overlapping the starting body, joinedwith the starting body, cut out of the starting body, or intersected with the starting body.
Figure 19: The distribution of extrude types (left) and operations (right).
Figure 20: Example designs created using randomized reconstruction commands.
Figure 21: Different construction sequences (A-C) for the same geometry. During conversion toa face extrusion sequence, the necessary face information (highlighted in red) does not exist inthe target, meaning B and C can not be converted. Green arrows indicate new body/join extrudeoperations, while red arrows indicate cut extrude operations.
Figure 22: Average reconstruction time per design for combinations of agents and search strategies.
Figure 23: Reconstruction results over 100 search steps using the gcn agent with best first search(best), random rollout search (rand) and beam search (beam).
