Figure 1: Transference in (a) CelebA for a subset of 9 attributes; (b) Meta-World for “push”, “reach”,“press button top”, and “open window”. To determine task groupings, we compute the transferenceof each task i on all other tasks j, i.e. Z{ti}→j and average over time. For the purpose of illustration,we normalize the transference along each axis. Notice the majority of the tasks in (a) concen-trate around a single value for each attribute. Tasks which exhibit transference above this value areconsidered to have relatively high transference. For instance, A3 exhibits higher-than-average trans-ference on A0, A4, and A5. A similar effect is observed in (b), with “close window” manifestinghigh transference on “push” and “reach”.
Figure 2: Effect of convergence on transference for CelebA attributes A6, A7, and Ag. Transferenceis highly dynamic and changes over the course of training. See Section 5.2 for more details.
Figure 3: (Top) Performance of reach when co-trained with “push” and one of “press button top”,“close window”, or “open window”. (Bottom) performance of “push” when co-trained with reachand one of “press button top”, “close window”, or “open window”. In both cases, the best perfor-mance is achieved by co-training with “close window”. Performance is degraded when co-trainedwith “open window”.
Figure 4: Total loss in MultiFashion along a linear interpolation between the current and updatedshared parameter values. We extend the interpolation to a magnitude 3× the original update toillustrate the curvature along this direction. The dashed vertical line crosses the loss curves at theoriginal update. In all cases, a step along the left gradient is better.
Figure 5: CelebA Encoder and Decoder used for measuring transference and determining whichtasks should train together.
Figure 6: LeNet used in experiments. Note, the fully convolutional encoder and shallow neural netdecoder.
Figure 7: Expanded 1-d loss landscapes along each gradient direction.
Figure 8: 2-Dimensional loss landscape of the (a) left digit loss, (b) right digit loss, and (c) thecombined (average of left and right) loss in MultiFashion in a step where IT-MTL chooses the leftgradient for the shared parameter update. The × symbol indicates the location of the minimum valueof the loss in the local landscape and • shows the projected coordinates of the current parameter.
