Figure 1: Components of the semiconductor device simulation. (a) Schematic diagram of a devicewith multiple terminals (yellow bars). (Input) (b) Current-voltage characteristics. (Output) (c) In-ternal quantity called the electrostatic potential. In order to calculate the terminal current, thoseinternal quantities are needed.
Figure 2: A proposed device template.
Figure 3: Layer structures adopted in the two-dimensional MOSFET. (a) CNN and (b) FCN.
Figure 4: (a) Electrostatic potential profile predicted by the CNN at VG = VD = 0.24 V. (b) Differencebetween (a) and the numerical solution. The maximum potential error is about 0.1 V, which isreasonably small.
Figure 5:	Same quantities with Figure 4 for a different MOSFET with LG = 164 nm. Vg = 0.05 Vand Vd = 0.66 V.
Figure 6:	(a) Convergence behavior. (b) Failure rate for a drain voltage outside the training range.
Figure 7:	Numerical stability and speed of the proposed approach. (a) Distribution of the Newtoniterations out of 1000 test cases. (b) Distribution of the Newton iterations with the conventionalmethod. (c) Trade-off between the numerical stability and the simulation speed.
Figure 8: Complex two-dimensional domain. (a) An unstructured mesh for a MOSFET. (b) Layerstructure of the adopted neural network. We have an internal CNN. (c) Predicted potential profile atVG = VD = 1.0 V. Colors represent the electrostatic potential.
Figure 9:	Grid points (Blue circles) and a finite volume surrounding the center point (A red pen-tagon).
Figure 10:	(a) Distribution of the selected devices in the Lg -tox plane. (b) Training and validationerrors as functions of the learning epoch.
Figure 11: Distribution of the Newton iterations. Two methods (the CNN and the local linear re-gression) are compared.
Figure 12: Distribution of the Newton iterations. Two methods (the CNN and the FCN) are com-pared.
Figure 13: Entire mesh structure of the MOSFET in Figure 8a. Numbers in the axes representcoordinates in the micrometer unit.
Figure 14: Training and validation errors as functions of the learning epoch.
