Figure 1: The embedding distributions extractedby (a) L2KD, and (b) ProxylessKD0.0proximate embedding centers corresponding tothe label of the image. Inspired by this, wepropose to initialize the weight of the student’sclassifier with the weight of the teacher’s clas-sifier and fix it during the distillation process, which forces the student to produce an embeddingspace as consistent with that of the teacher as possible. Different from previous knowledge dis-tillation works (Hinton et al., 2015; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Romero et al., 2014; Parket al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019) and L2KD, the proposed ProxylessKD not only directly optimizesthe target task but also considers minimizing the intra-class distance and maximizing the inter-classdistance. Meanwhile it can benefit from large margin constraints (e.g. Cosface loss (Wang et al.,2018a) and Arcface loss (Deng et al., 2019a)). As shown in Figure 1, the intra-class distance inProxylessKD combined with Arcface loss is much closer than L2KD, and the inter-class distance inProxylessKD combined with Arcface loss is much larger than L2KD. Thus it can be expected thatour ProxylessKD is able to improve the performance of face recognition, which will be experimen-tally validated.
Figure 2: The diagram of proposed ProxylessKD. We firstly train a teacher model (a) or ensemblemultiply trained teacher models (b), and then initialize the weight of the student’s classifier withthe weight of the teacher’s or the ensembled teachers’ classifier and fix the weight in the distillationstage.
Figure 3: The evaluation of different margins in Arcface loss function(k) TOP1(%) on IJB-C(1-N)4.3	Comparing with other methodsSingle and multiple model mode. We show two evaluation modes in Table 5, 6, 7. L2KD-s andProxylessKD-s mean the embeddings are only extracted by the student model (single model mode),and the suffix of “-m” represents the embeddings of database are extracted with a teacher modelwhile the embeddings of query images are extracted by the student model (multiple model mode).
