Figure 1: The overall tree structure of the SANE system, here with 2 layers of nodes. Each nodecontains an actor and a critic.
Figure 2: On the left is an example of inference, which results in the generation of actions to executein the environment. On the right is the associated adding of replay entries to the nodes that activatedat t = 0, after the collection phase.
Figure 3: The two parts of updating the structure of the tree: promoting nodes to a higher level, viacloning, and the merging of nodes together when the maximum size has been exceeded.
Figure 4: Sequential MNIST results: Each graph visualizes all networks on the given digit. The x-axis is consistent across graphs. Training on a newly introduced digit occurs in the shaded regions,and evaluation to test recall happens everywhere else. SANE is the only method to not catastrophi-cally forget. Digit 9 can be found in the Appendix.
Figure 5: Results for the MiniGrid experiments, in the order in which they were trained. Trainingoccurs in the shaded region, and the rest of the graph depicts recall while the other environments aretrained.
Figure 6: The nodes promoted by SANE while running the MiniGrid (left) and MNIST (right)experiments. For clarity they have been smoothed by averaging over a window of size 20.
Figure 7: An example of four instances where the same node was triggered. When this node fires,the action taken is for the agent to move forward.
Figure 8: The result of training on digit 9, annexed here for Want of space.
Figure 9: Comparison of CLEAR methods to observe the trade-off between speed of learning a newtask and recall of old tasks, in MNIST. The number represents the fraction of the training batch (ofsize 8) that is from the replay buffer. SANE also included for comparison.
Figure 10: Comparison of CLEAR methods to observe the trade-off between speed of learning anew task and recall of old tasks, in Minigrid. The number represents the fraction of the trainingbatch (of size 8) that is from the replay buffer. SANE also included for comparison.
