Figure 1: An overview of the ALANS2 learner. For an RPM instance, the neural visual perception moduleproduces the belief states for all panels: an object CNN extracts object attribute distributions for each imageregion, and a belief inference engine marginalizes them out to obtain panel attribute distributions. For eachpanel attribute, the algebraic abstract reasoning module transforms the belief states into matrix-based algebraicrepresentations and induces hidden operators by solving inner optimizations. The answer representations areobtained by executing the induced operators, and the choice most similar to the prediction is selected as thesolution. An example of the underlying discrete algebra and its correspondence is also shown on the right.
Figure 2: Isomorphism between theabstract algebra and the matrix-basedrepresentation. Operator induction re-duced to matrices.
Figure 3: Examples of RPM instances With the missing entries filled by solutions generated by the ALANS2learner. Ground-truth relations are also listed. Note the generated results do not look exactly like the correctchoices due to random rotations during rendering, but they are semantically correct.
Figure S1:	A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the systematicity split. Note that in the trainingexample, the arithmetic relation (in number) is addition and the shifting is always a left shift (in type, size, andcolor). In the test example, the shifting becomes a right shift (in type), the size progression has a step of 2, andcolor arithmetic becomes subtraction.
Figure S2:	A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the productivity split. Note that in the trainingexample, the constant rule is applied to the number, type, and size, while the progression rule is applied oncolor. In the testing example, the arithmetic rule is applied on all attributes.
Figure S3: A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the localism split. Note that in the trainingexample, the arithmetic rule is on all attributes. In the test example, the progression rule is applied on numberand the constant rule on all other attributes.
