Figure 1: Visualization of the inconsistent stylized texture in spatially corresponding areas. (a) Given3-view images and a style image, we compared the stylization results of conventional monocularstyle transfer method (first row) and our method (second row).
Figure 2: Qualitative comparisons of constraint effects between various consistency losses.
Figure 3: An overall framework of MVAST-O. Our framework consists of a VGG-16 encoder, anocclusion estimation module, an MVS module, and a Local Patch Alignment (LPA) module. Thestylized results are iteratively optimized through the back-propagation of the total loss.
Figure 4: An overall framework of MVAST-FF. Our framework stylizes multi-view scenes in fivelevels in a coarse-to-fine way. At each level, it aligns local patches through the Local Patch Align-ment (LPA) module and applies Camera Frame-wise Average(CFA) to fuse the transformed features.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons with arbitrary style transfer baselines and our methods.
Figure 7: Occlusion maps and stylization re-Figure 6: Coarse-to-fine stylization results of sults with MVSNet predictions without occlu-MVAST-FF.	sion map.
Figure 6: Coarse-to-fine stylization results of sults with MVSNet predictions without occlu-MVAST-FF.	sion map.
Figure 8: Qualitative ablation results on MVS module and the induced stylization results.
Figure 9: Internal computation descriptions of the Local Patch Alignment (LPA) module essentialfor stroke consistency regularization.
Figure 10: Internal computation descriptions of the Multi-view stereo (MVS) module.
Figure 11: Qualitative results of the feed-forward based multi-view aribtrar style transfer algorithm(MVAST-FF). We used a multi-view scenes from Scan75 split of the DTU dataset for content images.
Figure 12: Qualitative results of the feed-forward based multi-view aribtrar style transfer algorithm(MVAST-FF). We used a multi-view scenes from Scan118 split of the DTU dataset for contentimages. 4th and 5th columns visualize the second and third scenes in the perspective of cameraframe of the first scene.
