Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed representational model. (a) 2D local polar system centered at X foregocentric self-motion, to be embedded in Rd. (b) 2D local displacement δr and local change of direction δθ. (c)Mirroring relations in (b). X is mirrored by v(x). Local displacement δr from X along direction θ is mirroredby B(θ)δr applied to v(x). Local change of direction δθ is mirrored by Cδθ applied to B(θ).
Figure 2: Illustration of ba-sis expansion model Aχθ(x)=Pd=I Ui,χθVi(x), where Vi(x) isthe response map of i-th grid cell,shown at the bottom, which shows5 different i. Aχ0 (x) is the re-sponse map of place cell associ-ated with x0, shown at the top,which shows 3 different x0. ui,x0is the connection weight.
Figure 4: Model grid cells exhibit modular structure that is consistent with experimental data.(a) Examples ofautocorrelograms of the response maps and the corresponding gridness scores, each of which is from a differentmodule. (b) Multi-modal distribution of grid scales. The scale ratios closely match the real data (Stensola et al.,2012). (c) Multi-modal distribution of grid orientations.
Figure 5: The learned model can perform path integration. (a) Black: example trajectory. The decodedself-positions (red) accurately matches the real path. (b) Path integration error over number of time steps. (c)Path integration error over different block sizes, for 50 and 100 time steps. For (b) and (c), averaged error and ±1 standard deviation band over 1,000 episodes are shown. (d) Path integration error with introduced errors. Left:Gaussian noise. Right: dropout mask.
Figure 6: Correlation heatmap for each pair of the learned vi (x) and vj (x). The correlations arecomputed over 80 × 80 lattice of x.
Figure 7: Learned patterns of u(X) with 6 blocks of size 32 cells in each block. Every row shows thelearned patterns within the same block.
Figure 8: Learned patterns with 6 blocks of size 16. Top: v (x). Bottom: u(x). Every row shows thelearned patterns within the same block.
Figure 11: Learned patterns of a block of B(θ). Each curve shows the patterns of one element ofB(θ) over θ ∈ [0, 2π]. Since B(θ) is skew-symmetric, the diagonal values are zeros and the value ofBij(θ) is the same as the value of Bji(θ). Regular sine/cosine tunings emerge.
Figure 12: Spatial profile of the patterns of v(x) over the 80 × 80 lattice.
Figure 13: Learned patterns of v(x) in ablation study, where the model is trained with a CertainComponent removed.
Figure 14: Examples of path planning in open field. Red star denotes the target. Three scales ofAγ (x, x0) are used (σγ = [0.07, 0.14, 0.28]). Different colors denote the kernel chosen at each step.
