Figure 2: The proposed architecture. Data from two views is propagated through stochastic gates. The gatesoutput is fed into two neural sub-nets that have a shared loss. The shared loss is computed on both neuralsub-nets output representations (with dimension d = 3 in this example). The shared loss combines a totalcorrelation term and a differentiable regularization term which induces sparsity in the input variables.
Figure 3: Left: Regularization path of DG-CCA on data generated from the linear model. The left y-axis(green) represents the sum of active gates (by expectation) after training. The right y-axis represents theTTempirical correlation between the estimated representations, i.e. P = φ X T Y^, where φ and rη are theestimated canonical vectors. Dashed lines indicate the correct number of active coefficients (green) and truecorrelation ρ (blue). Note that for small values of λ = λx = λy the model select more variables than neededand attains a higher correlation value, this is a similar over-fitting phenomenon that CCA suffers from. Right:True canonical vector φ along with the estimated vectors using DG-CCA (φ) and CCA (^).
Figure 4: Top: two samples from the spinning puppets videos. Arrows indicate the spinning direction of eachpuppet. Bottom: the converged active gates for each video. There are 372 and 403 active gates for the left andright videos respectively.
Figure 5: The two DG-CCA embedding of the Yoda+Bulldog video (left) and Bulldog+Bunny (right). Weoverlay each embedding with 5 images corresponding to 5 points in the embedding spaces. The resultingembeddings are correlated with the angular rotation of the Bulldog, which is the common rotating puppet inthis experiment.
Figure 6: Images from noisy MNIST (left) and corresponding images from background MNIST (right). In thebottom right of both figures, we presents the active gates (white values within a green frame). There are 277and 258 active gates for view I and II respectively.
Figure 7: Top: Clean sample Sonograms of an explosion based on the E and N channels (left and rightrespectively). Arrows highlight the Primary (P) and Secondary (S) waves caused by the explosion. Middle:Noisy sonograms generated by adding sonograms of vehicle recordings. Bottom: the active gates for bothchannels. Note that the gates are active at time frequency bins which correspond to the P and S waves (see topleft figure).
Figure 8: k-means and SVM classification accuracy (left) and mutual information score (right) vs. the numberof selected features.
Figure 9: Classification accuracy on the noisy seismic data. Performance is evaluated using linear SVM inthe 3 dimensional embedding. Comparing performance of DG-CCA for different levels of sparsity, and usinglinear and nonlinear activation (Tanh).
