Figure 1: (a) Illustration of our framework. We consider N independent agents (i.e., no sharedparameters between agents) with one replay buffer. (b) Uncertainty estimates from an ensemble ofneural networks on a toy regression task (see Appendix C for more experimental details). The blackline is the ground truth curve, and the red dots are training samples. The blue lines show the meanand variance of predictions over ten ensemble models. The ensemble can produce well-calibrateduncertainty estimates (i.e., variance) on unseen samples.
Figure 2: Learning curves on OpenAI Gym with noisy rewards. To verify the effects of the weightedBellman backups (WBB), we consider SUNRISE with WBB and without WBB. The solid line andshaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across four runs.
Figure 3: (a) Learning curves of SUNRISE with random weight (RW) and the proposed weightedBellman backups (WBB) on the SlimHumanoid-ET environment with noisy rewards. (b) Effects ofUCB exploration on the Cartpole environment with sparse reward. (c) Learning curves of SUN-RISE and single agent with h hidden units and five gradient updates per each timestep on theSlimHumanoid-ET environment. (d) Learning curves of SUNRISE with varying values of ensemblesize N on the Ant environment.
Figure 4: Learning curves of SUNRISE and single agent with h hidden units and five gradientupdates per each timestep on OPenAI Gym. The solid line and shaded regions represent the meanand standard deviation, respectively, across four runs.
Figure 5: Learning curves of SUNRISE with varying values of ensemble size N . The solid line andshaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across four runs.
Figure 6:	Learning curves of (a-f) SAC and (g-I) RAD on DeepMind Control Suite. The solid lineand shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across five runs.
Figure 7:	Learning curves on Atari games. The solid line and shaded regions rePresent the meanand standard deviation, resPectively, across three runs.
Figure 8: Learning curves on Atari games. The solid line and shaded regions represent the meanand standard deviation, respectively, across three runs.
Figure 9: Learning curves on Atari games. The solid line and shaded regions represent the meanand standard deviation, respectively, across three runs.
