Figure 1: Overview of our approach. UNHCLE learns a hierarchical latent space of concepts describing longhorizon tasks like cooking and chess gameplay.
Figure 2: Overview of our approach. UNHCLE learns a hierarchical semantically-meaningful embeddingspace which allows it to perform complex downstream tasks such as temporal concept segmentation and labelprediction. Refer to Section 2.1 for details about the abbreviations used in the figure.
Figure 4: Example Hierarchy of concepts discovered by UNHCLE on the YouCook2 dataset3.3.2	Comparison with BaselinesIn this section, we evaluate the performance of UNHCLE quantitatively on YouCook23 and quantifyits ability to generate coherent concepts that align with the human annotated ground truths usingthe TW-IoU metric. We compare our approach with 4 baselines. (1) Random baseline predictssegment randomly on the basis of uniformly sampled timestamps for a given video on the basis of itsduration. (2) EQUALDIV consists of dividing the video into conceptual segments of equal duration(3) GRU-supervised: Further we also consider a naive supervised baseline comprising of a GRUCho et al. (2014) based encoder that sequentially processes the Resnet features corresponding toframes in a video followed by a decoder GRU that attends Bahdanau et al. (2014) on encoder outputsand is trained to sequentially predict end timestamp of each meaningful segment (variable in number)in the video. (4) FLAT w/o comment: We implement the Shankar et al. (2019) approach which takesas input, a sequence of video frames and discovers a single level of concepts without any hierarchy.
Figure 5: In this figure, we show that using commentary as guide during training, UNHCLE learns to bettercombine low-level concepts to form high-level concepts which are better aligned towards our ground-truthannotations. A refers to the concept segments discovered w/o comments and B refers to the one with comment.
Figure 6: Three model variants are shown here. (A) refers to UNHCLE w/o comment. (B) refers to the DirectHierarchy variant where we directly predict the high-level skill using OCA transformer. (C) refers to FLATbaseline with comment.
Figure 7: Skills discovered in the French defence.
Figure 9: Skills discovered in the Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation :Linksspringer Variation opening.
Figure 11: Skills discovered in the Philidor Defense opening.
