Figure 1: Illustration of the OapRS compared with other methods. The line denotes the optimaltrajectory of the learned policies. There are several policies in domain randomization and OapRSsince the methods learn to adapt in multiple simulators. The gray oval denotes the consistency region.
Figure 2:	Illustration of the performance in synthetic environments. The solid curves are the meanreward and the shadow is the standard error of three seeds.
Figure 3:	Illustration of the performance in distored synthetic environments. The solid curves are themean reward and the shadow is the standard error of three seeds. In limited setting, we sample β foreach simulator and fix it. In unlimited setting, we sample β for each simulator and each episode.
Figure 4:	Illustration of the performance in semi-online and online tests. In the semi-online setting,the Y-axis is the averaged long-term reward among the users in the environments. In the online test,the Y-axis is the averaged daily reward. The rewards of online data are rescaled.
Figure 5: Comparison of SA-DAE and vanilla VAE through the directed graphical model. The circlesdenote the variable nodes. The rounded rectangle denotes the dataset nodes, in which the notation inthe corner denotes the number of datasets. θ denotes the approximation parameters of the generativemodel, and κ denotes the parameters of the variational approximation model.
Figure 6: Illustration of generative action distribution for optimal policies in LTS3. The score isrescaled into (-1, 1) from (0, 30). We sample 750 trajectories of different customers and draw thehistogram of these sampled actions.
Figure 7: Illustration of KL divergence of the training set and testing set in LTS3. The solid curvesare the mean reward of three seeds. The dark shadow is the standard error, and the light one is themin-max range of three seeds.
Figure 8: Illustration of the histogram about customer feature of oi in reconstructed and real data inthe task of LTS3.
Figure 9:	Illustration of the visualization on υ . The X-axis denotes the first principal component,and the Y-axis denotes the second one. Each cross point denotes the projection of the latent code forthe state distribution. The numbers with the same color to the point denote the ground-truth of μc.
Figure 10:	Illustration of the performance in synthetic environments in different ωc. The solid curvesare the mean reward and the shadow is the standard error of three seeds.
Figure 11: Illustration of the daily finished-order curves of the constructed simulator and real data.
Figure 12:	Illustration of the reconstructed and embedding performance on SA-DAE. The solidcurves are the mean reward of two seeds. The dark shadow is the standard error, and the light one isthe min-max range of two seeds.
Figure 13:	Illustration of the network structure for OapRS.
Figure 14: Illustration of the mean order completion in the real-world ride-hailing application. Thenumber of mean order completion is computed by the mean value of the order completion in a cityper day. The result is scaled with a constant value. The legend “time period 1" and “time period 2”denote the data collected in adjacent 22 days of the same city.
Figure 15: Illustration of the histogram about customer features of reconstructed and real data.
