Figure 1:	Attack convergence (results shown are for the first subpopulation, Cluster 0). The maximumnumber of poisons is set using the 0.01-close threshold to target classifier.
Figure 2:	Test accuracy for each subpopulation with classifiers induced by poisoning points obtainedfrom our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 3: Attack convergence (results shown are for the target classifier of error rate 10%). Themaximum number of poisons is set using the 0.1-close threshold to target classifierNum of Poisons(b) Euclidean Distance to TargetNum of Poisons(a) 5% Error Rate(b) 10% Error Rate(c) 15% Error RateFigure 4:	Test accuracy for each target model of given error rate with classifiers induced by poisoningpoints obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 4:	Test accuracy for each target model of given error rate with classifiers induced by poisoningpoints obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 5:	Lower bound computed in each iteration of running algorithm 1 when the target classifier ofthe algorithm is the classifier induced from our Attack (classifier in Table 2). The maximum numberof poisons is set using the 0.1-close threshold to classifier induced from our attack.
Figure 6: Lower bound computed in each iteration of running algorithm 1 when the target classifierof the algorithm is the classifier induced from the KKT Attack (classifier in Table 3). The maximumnumber of poisons is set using the 0.1-close threshold to KKT induced classifier.
Figure 7:	Test accuracy with classifiers obtained from our attack and KKT attack. Target modelfor KKT attack is generated from the original generation process and target model for our attack isgenerated from the improved generation process. Maximum number of poisoning points is obtainedby running our attack with target model generated from the original process and resultant classifier is0.1-close to the target.
Figure 8:	SVM on Dogfish dataset: attack convergence (results shown are for the target classifierof error rate 10%). The maximum number of poisons is set using the 2.0-close threshold to targetclassifierNum of Poisons(a) 10% Error RateNum of Poisonso.2	∙ Our Attack■ KKT Attack0,0 0	50	100	150Num of Poisons(b) 20% Error Rate	(c) 30% Error RateFigure 9: SVM on Dogfish dataset: test accuracy of each target model of given error rateclassifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 9: SVM on Dogfish dataset: test accuracy of each target model of given error rateclassifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 10: Logistic regression model on Adult dataset: attack convergence (results shown are for thefirst subpopulation, Cluster 0). The maximum number of poisons is set using the 0.05-close thresholdto target classifier.
Figure 11: Logistic regression model on Adult dataset: test accuracy for each subpopulation withclassifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 12: Logistic regression model on MNIST 1-7 dataset: attack convergence (results shown arefor the target classifier of error rate 10%). The maximum number of poisons is set using the 0.1-closethreshold to target classifier.
Figure 13: Logistic regression model on MNIST 1-7 dataset: test accuracy for each target model ofgiven error rate with classifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKTattack.
Figure 14: Logistic regression model on Dogfish dataset: attack convergence (results shown are forthe target classifier of error rate 10%). The maximum number of poisons is set using the 1.0-closethreshold to target classifierOur AttackKKT AttackOur AttackKKT AttackOur AttackKKT Attack(a) 10% Error Rate	(b) 20% Error Rate	(c) 30% Error RateFigure 15: Logistic regression model on Dogfish dataset: test accuracy of each target model of givenerror rate with classifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
Figure 15: Logistic regression model on Dogfish dataset: test accuracy of each target model of givenerror rate with classifiers induced by poisoning points obtained from our attack and the KKT attack.
