Figure 1: XLVIN model summary. The individual modules are explained (and colour-coded) inSection 3.1, and the dataflow is outlined in Section 3.2.
Figure 2: Success rate on 8 × 8(top) and 16 × 16 (bottom) held-out mazes for XLVIN, PPO, VINand GVIN, obtained after passingeach level of 8 × 8 train mazes.
Figure 3: Average reward on Freeway, Alien and Enduro over 1,000,000 processed transitions.
Figure 4:	Top: A test maze (left) and the PCA projection of its TransE state embeddings (right),colour-coded by distance to goal (in green). Bottom: PCA projection of the XLVIN state embed-dings after passing the first (left), second (middle), and ninth (right) level of the continual maze.
Figure 5:	Comparison of XLVIN and ATreeC update rules over the first 1,000,000 Atari transitions.
Figure 6: XLVIN model summary with compact dataflow. The individual modules are explained(and colour-coded) in Section 3.1, and the dataflow is outlined in Section 3.2.
Figure 7: The seven environments considered within our evaluation: 8 × 8 and 16 × 16 mazes (Tamaret al., 2016) (known grid-like MDP), continuous control environments (CartPole-v0, Acrobot-v1,MountainCar-v0) and pixel-based environments (Atari Freeway, Alien and Enduro).
Figure 8:	Number of mazes with the optimal path of given length from: 8 × 8 train dataset (left),8 × 8 test dataset (middle) and 16 × 16 test dataset (right).
Figure 9: Synthetic graphs constructed for pre-training the GNN executor: Maze (left), CartPole(middle) and random deterministic (20 states, 8 actions) (right)F Synthetic graphsFigure 9	presents the three kinds of synthetic graphs used for pretraining the GNN executor. Theone for mazes (left) emphasises the terminal node as a node to which all nodes are connected; allother nodes have a maximum of eight neighbours, corresponding to the possible action types.
Figure 10: Procedurally generated contextual 8 × 8 mazes. The green cell represents the goal, andthe blue cell represents the agent. Black cells represent walls. The upper and left borders’ intensityis modified to mirror the sampled values of a and b, determining the environment dynamics.
Figure 11: Success rate of the XLVIN model against VIN and PPO on the contextual maze environ-ment, after training on each level, on held-out test mazes.
Figure 12: Freeway frames (above) and reconstructions (below) using a VAE-style world model.
