Figure 1: GL-Disen architecture: Given an input graph G, We first send it through a GNN to ob-tain individual global and local latent posterior distributions (Ex: q(zg(1)|G), q(zι(1)∣G)) for eachpatch. Then all individual global posterior distributions q(zg(i)|G) are sent through ACCUM pro-cess to accumulate into a single posterior q(zg |G) for the global latent, using the procedure definedin Eq.9. Sampled local latent factors from their respective local posteriors are combined with theglobal latent Zg, and this becomes the input to the decoder to reconstruct the graph as per Eq.10.
Figure 2: Analysis on GL-Disen: (a) Disentanglement ability of learnt global and local latent factorsby GL-Disen via absolute values of correlation compared with GVAE, which does not performglobal/local disentanglement. (b) Inter-patch MAPD among global and local latent factors. LowerMAPD for global factors indicates the global factor representations disentangled by GL-Disen isindeed shared among the entire graph, unlike local factors which are local to certain patches.
Figure 3:	Variation of zg (Blue) and zlg (Orange) of each graph generated with different p valuesfore, we check if global latent variables extracted from each patch should be similar to each-other than their local counterparts. Since multiple global generative factors may contribute forthe graph generation and the information propagation is different from patch to patch, we cannotassume that the extracted global factors to be exactly the same. But they should be more similarthan extracted local latent factors. We evaluate this using the Mean Absolute Pairwise Difference(MAPD) measure used by Higgins et al. (2017) for the disentanglement metric proposed in β-VAE.
Figure 4:	Impact analysis of global latent representation zg on the generation process of GL-Disenand recovering the global generative factor p. (a) plots hoW the distribution of the edge densityprobability p_gen (the recovered p) changes with the increase of Zg value. (b) visualizes generatedgraphs Where in each roW local latent representation zg is fixed and in each column zg is fixed. ThisshoWs that zg has a strong negative correlation With the global generative factor.
Figure 5: Comparison of the impact of disentangled local only, disentangled global-local combinedand entangled (GVAE) latent representations for graph classification performance against disentan-gled global only Zg representation. (best viewed in colour)Figure 5 visualizes the impact of local latent factorsZl and entangled latent factors (latent repre-sentation from vanilla GVAE) against global latent factors Zg for graph classification task. Eachdotted line indicates the accuracy value obtained when each of these latent representations are indi-vidually sent to SVM for graph classification. We can observe that global latent representation hasachieved the best individual performance surpassing local only and entangled. GL-Disen local onlyperformance has been very close to entangled performance obtained from GVAE. We believe this isbecause, although global information are included in GVAE’s latent representation (in an entangledmanner), each observation is treated in an IID manner. Hence those global information might begetting suppressed in order to give space for latent factors which enhances reconstruction ability ofthe model. Solid blue line shows how the graph classification accuracy changes with increasing λ.
Figure 6: Impact on Mean test set accuracy on Node classification with different η on CiteSeer.
Figure 7: Correlation matrices to show the dependence among global and local latent factors. Verylow correlation close to 0.0 shows that these is very less correlation between these two factors. Thesesample graphs from MUTAG dataset showcase the capability of GL-Disen in producing mutuallyexclusive information for its global and local latent factors.
Figure 8: Part 1 : Mean Absolute Pairwise Difference among global latent factors and local latentfactors for two graphs from MUTAG. These matrices clearly show that the inter-node latent repre-sentation difference for produced global latent factors is very low compared to local latent factors.
Figure 9: Part 2 : Mean Absolute Pairwise Difference among global latent factors and local latentfactors for two graphs from MUTAG. These matrices clearly show that the inter-node latent repre-sentation difference for produced global latent factors is very low compared to local latent factors.
Figure 10: Visualizes denser generated graphs where in each row local latent representation Zg isfixed and in each column Zg is fixed. This shows that Zg has a strong negative correlation with theglobal generative factor.
