Figure 1: Dataset examples and statistical comparisons. (a) and (b) are examples of U-RISC andISBI2012. The first line shows the original image, and the second line shows its annotation. (c)shows the pixel number of U-RISC, ISBI2012, and SNEMI3D datasets. (d) shows the image numberof the three datasets.
Figure 2: Examples of images with their labels. The left of (a) (b) are two original image parts, andthe right are the images covered by their labels (red lines).
Figure 3: Example of iterative labeling. (a) shows the original EM image. (b) and (c) shows thefirst and second round of annotation processes. The red arrows point to the deleted parts during theinspection processes, and the blue arrows point to the added parts.
Figure 4: Examples of some segmentation results. (a) is the original EM image. (b) is the manualannotation of cell membrane. (c) and (d) are segmentation results from GLNet and U-Net.
Figure 5: Overview of PHD. The PHD evaluation criterion takes two segmentation results as input.
Figure 6: Consistency with human perception. The color bars show the consistency results of F1score, IoU, TPVF, TNVF, Prec, RVD, Hausdorff, ASSD, V-Rand, and V-Info without and withskeletonization (-SK). The gray bars show the consistency result of PHD. The numbers on X-axisdenote the tolerance distance settings.
Figure 7: Interface of perceptual consistency experiments.
Figure 8:	Examples of subjective experiment images (1). The figure in green box is the choice ofmost subjects. The scores of F1 score, IOU and Dice are only used to illustrate the inconsistencybetween the three criteria and human perception, which are not shown to the subjects during thesubjective experiments.
Figure 9:	Examples of subjective experiment images (2). The figure in green box is the choice ofmost subjects. The scores of F1 score, IOU and Dice are only used to illustrate the inconsistencybetween the three criteria and human perception, which are not shown to the subjects during thesubjective experiments. For the example in the last line, most of the subjects chose “Difficult tochoose”.
Figure 10: Examples of segmentation results (1).
Figure 11: Examples of segmentation results (2).
