Figure 1: Schematic overview of our method. 1. A density p* (x) with support on a d-dimensionalmanifold X (top left) is inflated by adding noise σ2 in the normal space (top right). 2. We havean NF F-1(χ) learn this inflated density q(X) using a well-known reference measure PU(u). 3.
Figure 2: Q-normal separability for different noise distributions qn(X∖χ) used to inflate X = S1(black line). Left: X is Q-normally separable since every point in the inflated space X (red shadedarea) has a unique generator. Middle: X is Q-normally separable since PX —almost every pointin X has a unique generator. Right: X is not Q-normally separable since every point in the darkshaded area has two generators.
Figure 3: Learned densities for σ20.01 (above) and σ 21 (below), respectively. First row:Samples used for training the respective model: FG (left), NG (middle), FOM/ χ2 (right). The blackline depicts the manifold X (a circle with radius 3) and the color codes the value of p* (x). Secondrow: Colored line: Learned density p(χ) according to equation (7) multiplied by 3. Blackline:ground truth von Mises distribution.
Figure 4: KS values for the NG- (blue) and FG-noise method (orange) depending on σ2 ∈[10-9, 10] and the embedding dimension D = 5, 10, 15, 20 in log-scale. For D = 2 and D = 20(top right), the two vertical lines represent the lower and upper bound for σ2 estimated according toChapter 3.3 with 10K samples. We plot horizontally the KS value obtained from FOM. Bottom left:Optimal KS values depending on D. Bottom right: Optimal averaged σ2 such that optimal KS isobtained (bright). The maximum and minimum σ2 such that the FOM benchmark is outperformed(dark). The dashed horizontal lines are again the theoretical bounds. We used 10 seeds for the errorbars and plot in log-scale.
Figure 5: Left: Target density. Upper right: Learned densities using FOM and our method withGaussian noise and σ2 = 0.01. Lower right: KS vs. σ2 plot of the Gaussian noise model (full andin normal space) compared to the FOM with the theoretical bounds from Chapter 3.3 for σ2 depictedin vertical dashed lines (with 10K samples used to approximate these bounds).
