Figure 1: Overview of BROS for downstream KIE tasks. Tokens in a document are feed into BROSwith their bounding box information. After pre-trained with large-scale unlabeled documents, BROSis fine-tuned with a graph-based decoder for document KIE tasks that have small labeled documents.
Figure 2: Comparison of (a) conventional token masking and (b) area masking. Although there canbe multiple tokens in a single text block, the token masking flats all tokens of a document, selectsa token randomly (red), and masks it directly (black). In contrast, the area masking selects a textblock, identifies an area by expanding the block area with an exponential distribution (red), maskstokens in all text blocks of which center is aligned in the identified area (black). In both, 15% oftokens are masked.
Figure 3: Visual descriptions of BROS downstream tasks. For EE tasks, BROS combines two sub-tasks such as (a) and (b). For EL task, BROS links the first tokens of the entities.
Figure 4: OCR block sequence comparisons between appropriate reading order and commercialOCR (Google Cloud - Vision API) on FUNSD training sample. Red text denotes question, greentexts denotes answer, circled number denotes appropriate reading order, order of OCR output each.
Figure 5: Examples of EE and EL task definition through graph-based formalization in all down-stream tasks. For all EE tasks, the colored boxes indicate the first boxes of target classes and thegreen arrows represent next word connections. For example, the first menu in (b) has the first wordis “1001-Choco” and its next word is “Bun”. For EL tasks, the structural relationship between com-ponents are represented with red arrows. For example, the first menu (“1001-Choco Bun”) in (b)has multiple sub information such as unit price (“22.000”), count (“x1”), and total price (“22.000”).
Figure 6: Inference EE and EL results on a sample FUNSD image. The images of upper row showthe results of LayoutLM, BROS, and ground truth for EE task and the images of lower row showthose for EL task. In EE task, the red, green, and blue boxes indicate Question, Answer, ans Headerclasses, respectively. In EL task, the blue boxes indicate key blocks and the red lines show therelations.
