Figure 1: The PIVEN schematic architectureThe goal of the loss function of our approach, denoted as LPIVEN, is to balance two conflictinggoals: generating tight PIs and producing accurate value predictions. LPIVEN achieves this goal bysynchronizing two loss functions that are designed to assess each of the two goals described above.
Figure 2: Value prediction comparison, where y is sampled from skewed-normal distributionf (x; α) = 2φ(x)Φ(α ∙ x) where φ(x) and Φ(α ∙ x) denote the N(0,1) density and distributionfunction respectively; the parameter α denotes the skewness parameter.
Figure 3: RMSE as function of α on two of theUCI datasets. See Appendix D for full results.
Figure 4: (Left) An analysis of the effect of varying β values on PIVEN’s performance in terms of PIwidth and value prediction. (Right) The effect of various λ values on the tightness of the PI7 ConclusionsWe present PIVEN, a novel architecture for combining the generation of prediction intervals togetherwith specific value predictions in an end-to-end manner. By optimizing for these two goals simulta-neously we are able to produce tighter intervals while at the same time achieving greater quality inour value predictions. PIVEN’s performance is enhanced by two factors. First, its value-predictionand PI-prediction are connected, making it better at modeling non-uniform distributions in the PI.
Figure 5: Comparison of value prediction for QD vs. PIVEN method, where y was generated byf(x) = 1.5 sin(x).
Figure 6: Value prediction comparison, where y is sampled from skewed-normal distributionf (x; α) = 2φ(x)Φ(α ∙ x) where φ(x) and Φ(α ∙ x) denote the N(0,1) density and distributionfunction respectively; the parameter α denotes the skewness parameter.
Figure 7: Compassion between PIVEN and the baselines in terms of PICP (left), MPIW (center) andRMSE (right) for α = 0.05.
Figure 8: comparing PICP betWeen QD and PIVEN over different values of alpha.
Figure 9: comparing MPIW between QD and PIVEN over different values of alpha.
Figure 10: comparing RMSE between QD and PIVEN over different values of alpha.
Figure 11: Comparison of MAE metric in the training process. We observe that the values for QD (b)do not improve, which is expected since QD does not consider value prediction in its loss function.
Figure 12: Comparison of the MPIW metric between QD and PIVEN in the training process. Ascan be seen, PIVEN significantly improves over QD, and has a smaller gap between training andvalidation errors.
Figure 13: Comparison of PICP metric between QD and PIVEN in the training process. PIVENachieves higher coverage when two methods converges.
Figure 14: The predictions produced for outliers (i.e., very young/old individuals) by both PIVENand QD for the IMDB age estimation dataset. The results for QD are on the left, results for PIVENon the right.
