Figure 1: Illustration of multi-view disentangled representation. (a): The red and white graphicsindicate the shared information between different views, and the (private) exclusive informationwithin each view, respectively. (b): The exact disentangled representation can be achieved - theshared (gray area) and exclusive (white area) components are separated, when the four conditions indefinition 2.1 are satisfied. (c)(d)(e)(f): The exact disentangled representation cannot be guaranteedwhen any condition is violated. Intuitively, the proposed four conditions are necessary and sufficientconditions since any change of (b) will violate the definition.
Figure 2: Illustration of ourmodel, which corresponds tothe objective in Eq. 1 and theconditions in definition 2.1. Re-fer to the text for PoE (Productof Expert) in 2.1.
Figure 3: Visualization of reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations. The top andbottom rows correspond to the reconstruction results from the decoders of view-1 and view-2,respectively. ‘Shared’, ‘Exclusive’ and ‘S&E’ indicate shared, exclusive, and the combination ofshared and exclusive representations, respectively. ‘View-1’ and ‘View-2’ in the parentheses indicatethe view where these representations come from. Note that, the images in (e) ((j)) are reconstructedresults using decoder of view-1 (view-2) using the share representation from view-2 (view-1).
Figure 4:	Visualization of reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations after removingthe condition ②(intra-view exclusivity between si and ei). (Zoom in for best view).
Figure 5:	Visualization of reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations after removingthe condition ③(inter-view exclusivity between ei and ej). (Zoom in for best view).
Figure 6:	Visualization of reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations after removingthe condition ④(commonality between si and Sj). (Zoom in for best view).
Figure 7:	Visualization of reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations.‘O’, ‘S’ and ‘E’indicate original image, shared representation and exclusive representation respectively. ‘View-1’and ‘View-2’ in the parentheses indicate the view where these representations come from. (Zoom infor best view).
Figure 8:	Visualization of image reconstruction with shared and exclusive representations. We use thedecoder of the image view to reconstruct images by inputting the shared and exclusive representations,where ‘Original’ indicates the original images, ‘Shared’ and ‘Exclusive’ indicates the shared andexclusive representations, respectively. ‘View-1 S&E’ indicates the combination of shared andexclusive representations. Similarly, ‘View-2 shared’ and ‘View-2 exclusive’ indicate the sharedand exclusive representations from View-2, respectively, which are used as inputs into the decoder.
Figure 9: Example results for face retrieval and face editing.
Figure 10: Example results for attribute-specific face editing.
