Figure 1: Concept: Our Stochastic Subset Selection method is generic and can be applied to many type of sets.
Figure 2: Overview. The subset Ds is sampled by a stochastic 2-stage subset selection process. Dark shadedboxes correspond to selected elements while lightly shaded boxes correspond to non-selected elements inthe given set. Also, Ber and Cat correspond to the Bernoulli and Categorical distributions respectively. (a)Candidate(in blue) Selection. (b) Core Subset(in green) Selection using continuous relaxations of discretedistributions.
Figure 3: Graphical Models: (a) Feature Selection for Reconstruction. (b) Feature Selection for PredictionTask. (c) Instance Selection model. (d) Instance Selection model for Classification(c)	(d)3 Approach3.1	PreliminariesIn this work, we consider data of the type D = {d1 , . . . , dn} where individual di’s are possiblyrepresented as input xi and target yi . D is the complete set and we assume that within D, thereexists a subset Ds = {si, . . . , sk} ⊂ D such that k n and that for an arbitrarily defined lossfunction `(., D) that we are interested in optimizing over the full set D, Ds can be used as a proxyfor D such that `(., D) ≈ `(., Ds). In what follows, we present a method that learns the conditionaldistributionp(Ds|D) of the subset Ds via a two stage selection procedure dubbed candidate selectionand autoregressive subset selection. The overall objective is then to minimize the loss function withrespect to the subset Ds, Ep(Ds|D) [`(., Ds)]. When the set D itself follows a distribution of sets as inthe meta-learning framework, then the objective becomes ED[Ep(Ds|D) [`(., Ds)]]. In essence, weseek to construct a subset Ds that is optimally representative of the full set D w.r.t `(.).
Figure 4: Models’ performance on set reconstruction and classification task (lighter-color areas present thestandard deviations). (a) 1D Function reconstruction. (b) CelebA (reconstruction). (c) CelebA (classification)Figure 5: 1D Function Reconstruction.
Figure 5: 1D Function Reconstruction.
Figure 6: CelebA reconstruction samples with varying number of pixels.
Figure 7: Instance Selection Samples from a dataset of size 200.
Figure 8: Reconstruction samples of 1D functions with different selection methodsOriginal Image Pixels Selected for Pixels Selected for PiXelS Selected for PiXeIS Selected (RS)Classification (SSS) Reconstruction (SSS) Reconstruction (LTS)Figure 9: Selected pixels for different tasks on CelebA.
Figure 9: Selected pixels for different tasks on CelebA.
Figure 10: Visualization of a set with 200 images for instance selection. The two stage selection method in SSSis visualized as Candidate Set and SSS. A coreset of size 5 is visualized.
Figure 11: Sample visualization of prototype selection for the miniImagenet dataset on the few-shot classifica-tion task. Each row represents a set that corresponds to the support from which a prototype is selected for thefew-shot classification task.
