Figure 1: Diagram of decision-making problem for traffic mode. If time is crucial, the agent tend tochoose plan-A that takes less time, but it costs more. On the other hand, if cost is more importantmatters, the agent will be inclined to select plan-B that requires less cost, but it takes more time.
Figure 2: Illustration for process to approximate well-distributed robust Pareto frontier through theproposed algorithm.
Figure 3: Illustration of the mismatch betweenthe Pareto optimal solution and the correspond-ing preference. Suppose the point A representsa Pareto optimal solution, which and the originform the vector O~A. The corresponding prefer-ence vector can be represented by the vector OB .
Figure 4: Quality analysis of Pareto frontiers.
Figure 5: Pareto representation improvement scheme based on BO algorithm. The surrogate modelfor the objective function f (Ω) is typically a GauSSian Process. PoSteriorS represent the confidence amodel has about the function values at a point or set of points. Acquisition function is employed toevaluate the usefulness of optimal guess point corresponding to posterior distribution over f (Ω). Theexpected improvement method chosen to design the acquisition function in our scheme.
Figure 6: The learning curves and the Pareto frontiers obtained by different algorithms on SUMO.
Figure 7: The learning curves and the Pareto frontiers obtained by different methods on SWimmer-v2.
Figure 8: Robustness to environmental uncertainty. Disturbance probability represents the probabilityof a random disturbance being played instead of the selected action. Relative mass denotes the ratioof the current agent,s mass to its original mass.
Figure 9: (a) Velocity control for autonomous electric vehicle in SUMO; (b) Swimmer environmentin Mujoco; (c) Walker environment in Mujoco; (d) HalfCheetah environment in Mujoco.
Figure 10: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on Swimmer-v2 domain. Disturbance probabilityrepresents the probability of a random disturbance being played instead of the selected action. Relativemass denotes the ratio of the current agent’s mass to its original mass.
Figure 11: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on Swimmer-v2 domain.
Figure 12: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on Swimmer-v2 domain.
Figure 13: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on Swimmer-v2 domain.
Figure 14: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on Walker2d-v2 domain. Disturbance ProbabilityrePresents the Probability of a random disturbance being Played instead of the selected action. Relativemass denotes the ratio of the current agent’s mass to its original mass.
Figure 15: Robustness to environmental uncertainty on HalfCheetah-v2 domain.
