Figure 1: Anomaly score distributions for Deep SVDD (left) and Deep SAD (right) trained andtested using the synthetic dataset, estimated by Kernel Density Estimation.
Figure 2: Models (Deep SVDD v.s. Deep SAD) trained on the synthetic dataset: the quantiledistribution of relative scoring bias ξ (top 4 figures) and FPR (bottom 4 figures), computed on thetest set over 1500 runs. n =100, 1000 or 10000; α =0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2. The triangle in eachboxplot is the mean. For FPR, the red dotted line marks the target FPR of 0.05.
Figure 3: Model TPR under Scenario 1 and 2, trained on two real-world datasets: Fashion-MNISTand Cellular Spectrum Misuse. In each figure, we compare the performance of θ0 = Deep SVDD(semi-supervised) and θs = Deep SAD (supervised) when tested on abnormal data. We arrangeabnormal test data (by their class label) in decreasing similarity with training abnormal data. Theleftmost entry in each figure is the class used for abnormal training. For Fashion-MNIST, the normaldata is top; for Cellular Spectrum Misuse, the normal data is normal.
Figure 4: Anomaly score distributions for Deep SVDD (left) and HSC (right), trained on the syn-thetic dataset.
Figure 5: Anomaly score distributions for AE (left) and SAE (right), trained on the synthetic dataset.
Figure 6: Anomaly score distributions for AE (left) and ABC (right),trained on the synthetic dataset.
Figure 7: Anomaly score distributions for Deep SVDD (left) and Deep SAD (right), trained onFashion-MNIST (using top as the normal class and shirt as the abnormal class).
Figure 8: Anomaly score distributions for Deep SVDD (left) and Deep SAD (right), trained onCellular Spectrum Misuse (using normal as the normal class and NB-10ms as the abnormal class).
Figure 9: The quantile distribution on the synthetic dataset of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and(bottom) FPR, computed on the test set over 1500 runs, for Deep SVDD and HSC.
Figure 10: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 1500 runs, for AE and SAE trained on the synthetic dataset.
Figure 11: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 1500 runs, for AE and ABC trained on the synthetic dataset.
Figure 12: The quantile distribution of relative scoring bias ξ (top) and FPR (bottom), computed onthe test set over 1000 runs, for Deep SVDD and Deep SAD trained on Cellular Spectrum Misuse.
Figure 13: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 1000 runs, for Deep SVDD and HSC trained on Cellular Spectrum Misuse.
Figure 14: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 1000 runs, for AE and SAE trained on Cellular Spectrum Misuse.
Figure 15: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 1000 runs, for AE and ABC trained on Cellular Spectrum Misuse.
Figure 16: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 100 runs, for Deep SVDD and SAD trained on Fashion-MNIST.
Figure 17: The quantile distribution of (top) relative scoring bias ξ and (bottom) FPR, computed onthe test set over 100 runs, for Deep SVDD and SAD trained on StatLog.
