Figure 1: Architecture of a regression model with proposed approach2	Related workSemi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is a machine-learning strategy to learn using partially-labeled datasets(Chapelle et al., 2009). In the field of SSL, various methods have been developed, including those usinggenerative models (Kingma et al., 2014), graphs (Goldberg & Zhu, 2006), self-training (Rosenberg et al.,2005) and consistency regularization (Sohn et al., 2020). SSL can improve classification and regressionmodels by using information in a large set of unlabeled data to train a relatively small set of labeled data (Xieet al., 2019; Creswell et al., 2018; Dimokranitou, 2017; Rezagholiradeh & Haidar, 2018). These approachesgenerally assume that labeled and unlabeled datasets are well distributed without distortion.
Figure 2: Correlation plot of ground truth and predicted values of regression model (a) trained on unbiasedfully labeled data, (b) trained on skewed dataset and (c) trained on skewed dataset with proposed approach.
Figure 3: Correlation plot of ground truth and predicted value of regression model (a) trained on skeweddataset with only AAE based regularization and (b) trained on skewed dataset with only forcing outputdistribution. Vertical dotted line: bias threshold of the dataset. (c) and (d) represents histogram of groundtruth and predicted values of (a) and (b) respectively. Dark dashed line: assumed true distribution forcomparison.
Figure 4:	Correlation plot of ground truth and predicted values of regression model (a) trained on skeweddataset which have a gaussian distribution and (b) trained on the same skewed dataset with proposed ap-proach. (c, d) histogram of ground truth and predicted values of (a, b) respectively. Dark dashed line:histogram of labeled samples in the skewed dataset.
Figure 5:	Correlation plot of ground truth and predicted values of regression model (a) trained on skeweddataset and (b) trained on skewed dataset with proposed approach. Labeled samples only have the groundtruth values in the grey region. (c, d) histogram of ground truth and predicted values of (a, b) respectively.
Figure 6:	Correlation plot of ground truth and predicted values of regression model (a) trained on skeweddataset and (b) trained on skewed dataset with proposed approach. Labeled samples only have the groundtruth values in the grey region. (c, d) histogram of ground truth and predicted values of (a, b) respectively.
