Figure 1: Denoising results for real data. (a) An atomic-resolution electron-microscope image ofa platinum nanoparticle obtained via transmission electron microscopy at a magnification of overone million, as described in Section 4. The average image intensity is 0.45 electrons/pixel (i.e. alarge fraction of pixels represent zero electrons!), which results in an extremely low signal-to-noiseratio. (b) Denoised image obtained via Fourier-based filtering by a domain expert. (c) Denoisedimage obtained via the wavelet-based PURE-LET method (Luisier et al., 2010). (d) Denoised imageobtained by the proposed Simulation-Based Denoising framework. (e) Likelihood map quantifying towhat extent the atomic structure identified from the SBL denoised image is consistent with the data(see Section 3). Regions in red are more likely to correspond to atomic columns in the nanoparticle.
Figure 2: Simulation-based denoising framework. (Top) A training dataset is generated by simu-lating images with different structures at varying imaging conditions. (Middle) A CNN is trainedusing the simulated images, paired with noisy counterparts obtained by simulating the relevant noiseprocess. (Bottom) The trained CNN is applied to real data to yield a denoised image. After analyzingthe image to extract structure of interest, a likelihood map is generated to quantify the agreementbetween this structure and the noisy data.
Figure 3: Gradient analysis of the learned denoising function. (a) To compute the red pixel inthe denoised image (b), the proposed CNN uses a 220 × 220 area (red box) in the noisy image(a). The gradient of the denoised pixel with respect to its input indicates what regions in the noisyimage have a greater influence on the estimate (according to a first-order Taylor approximation tothe denoising map). The gradient (d) weights nearby pixels more heavily, but also has significantmagnitude at pixels located on different atoms. This suggests that the CNN combines local andnon-local information to estimate the pixel. See Figure 18 for additional examples using real data.
Figure 4: Likelihood map. When the simulated noisy image in (a) is denoised using the proposedframework (b), a spurious atom appears at the left edge of the nanoparticle (see zoomed image (d)).
Figure 5: Validation on real data. The real data consist of 40 frames which are approximatelystationary and aligned. Their temporal estimate therefore provide a reasonable estimate for the trueintensity profile. We compare the average intensity profile on the surface atomic columns of theplatinum for the denoised and noisy data. The profiles are very similar (except for some spuriousfluctuations in the average of the noisy data), which suggests that the proposed approach achieveseffective denoising on the real data.
Figure 6: Demonstration of contrast reversal with changes in defocus. (a) Image of the Pt/CeO2atomic structural model.(b) to (d) Simulated images under different electron-optical focusing con-ditions, emphasizing variations on the Ce and Pt column contrast. In (b), the image shows blackcontrast for both Ce and Pt columns. In (c), the Pt columns reverse contrast and now appear white,while Ce columns become challenging to discriminate. Finally, in (d) all of the atomic columnsappear with white contrast.
Figure 7: Image contrast variations due to thickness and defocus. (a) Image of the Pt/CeO2atomic structural model. (b1) to (b4) Simulated images at a defocus value of 13 nm, where thevariations of the contrast are due to the thickness of the model, increased from 3 nm to 6nm. (c1) to(c4) Contrast variations on simulated images due to defocus: the thickness of the model has beenkept constant at 5 nm and the defocus has been tuned to 1 nm, 7 nm, 13 nm, and 18 nm.
Figure 8: Summary of parameters considered during the modelling and image simulation pro-cesses. Subset of Pt/CeO2 atomic models presenting variations on the (a) structure and shape of thenanoparticle and the support, (b) the thickness of the CeO2 slab and (c) the tilt of the atomic models.
Figure 9: Variations in the structure/size of the supported Pt nanoparticle.(a) to (d) Atomicmodels of Pt nanoparticles (grey atoms) with different shapes and supported over a CeO2 slab (yellowand red atoms respectively). (a1) to (d1) Simulated images depicting the described atomic models,considering a thickness of 3 nm, 9 nm of defocus and no tilt on the model, whereas (a2) to (d2)illustrate the same model under different conditions: 5 nm thickness, 6 nm defocus and 4 degreestilted along X axis. All the simulated images present a Cs value of -13 μm.
Figure 10: Variations in the defects of the Pt surface structure. (a) Atomic model of a CeO2-supported Pt nanoparticle without any defects. The surface has been modified by (b) removing a fullatomic column, (c) removing half of the occupancy and (d) keeping a single atom. Black arrowspoint the sites where these defects are taking place. Models (b), (c) and (d) have been slightly tiltedto observe these modifications. (a1) to (d1) Simulated images of the presented atomic columnsconsidering a 3nm thickness, 9 nm defocus and no tilt.
Figure 11: Analysis of the noise in the real data. The analysis shows that the noise is approximatelyiid Poisson. (a) Pixel-wise mean over 40 frames of the real data described in Section 4. (b) Histogramof noisy pixel intensities from highlighted regions in the image matches, compared to a simulatedPoisson distribution. (c) The plot of empirical mean and standard deviation of pixels approximatelyfollows a line with unit slope, as expected from iid Poisson samples (the spread is due to averagingover only 40 frames).
Figure 12: Overfitting scaling and orientation. The plots show the performance of the proposednetwork in PSNR for simulated images that have different scalings (on the left, measured in terms ofthe corresponding pixel size in picometers) and orientations (on the right). The CNN was trainedon data augmented with rescaled and rotated images corresponding to the regions shaded in purple.
Figure 13: Generalization across different imaging parameters and signal structures. In orderto study the generalization ability of the proposed method we divided the simulated dataset describedin Section 4 into subsets, based on the atomic column contrast, (2) the structure/size of the supportedPt nanoparticle, and (3) the defects of the Pt surface structure. The tables show the test PSNR fornetworks trained and tested on different combinations of the subsets. (a) Networks trained on whiteand intermediate contrast generalize well to all other contrasts. The network trained on black contrastdoes not generalize to the others. (b) Networks trained on a type of nanoparticle structure generalizewell to all other types. (c) Networks trained on one type of defect or no defects generalize well todifferent types. Please refer to Fig 6, 10, 9 and 7 to see the effect of these parameters on the images.
Figure 14: Denoising results for simulated data. Our proposed approach produces denoised imagesof much higher quality than the other approaches, described in Sections C and D. In contrast tothe other methods, SBD combined with the proposed architecture is able to precisely recover thestructure of the nanoparticle and has very few artifacts.
Figure 15: Denoising results for simulated data. Our proposed approach produces denoised imagesof much higher quality than the other approaches, described in Sections C and D. In contrast tothe other methods, SBD combined with the proposed architecture is able to precisely recover thestructure of the nanoparticle and has very few artifacts.
Figure 16: Denoising results for real data. Our proposed approach produces denoised images ofmuch higher quality than the other approaches, described in Sections C and D. In contrast to the othermethods, SBD combined with the proposed architecture is able to precisely recover the structure ofthe nanoparticle and has very few artifacts in the vacuum region. The likelihood map quantifies theagreement between the observed data and the detected regions corresponding to atomic columns andto the vacuum.
Figure 17: Denoising results for real data. Our proposed approach produces denoised images ofmuch higher quality than the other approaches, described in Sections C and D. In contrast to the othermethods, SBD combined with the proposed architecture is able to precisely recover the structure ofthe nanoparticle and has very few artifacts in the vacuum region. The likelihood map quantifies theagreement between the observed data and the detected regions corresponding to atomic columns andto the vacuum.
Figure 18: Gradient analysis of the learned denoising function on real data. (a) To compute thered pixel in the denoised image (b), the proposed CNN uses a 220 × 220 area (red box) in the noisyimage (a). The gradient of the denoised pixel with respect to its input indicates what regions in thenoisy image have a greater influence on the estimate (according to a first-order Taylor approximationto the denoising map). The gradient (d) weights nearby pixels more heavily, but also has significantmagnitude at pixels located on different atoms. This suggests that the CNN combines local andnon-local information to estimate the pixel. The colorbar is shared across all the images.
