Figure 1: Relationship between H-divergence (this paper) and existing divergences. The JensenShannon divergence is an f -divergence but not an IPM; the MMD is an IPM but not an f -divergence;both are H-divergences. There are also H-divergences that are not f -divergences or IPMs.
Figure 2: Average test power (Left) and the average type I error (Right) on the Blob dataset fordifferent sample sizes. For our method (dashed line), H-Div (10) and H-Div (15) use a mixture ofGaussian distribution with 10 and 15 mixture components respectively (details in Section 4.3). Ourmethod has significantly better test power (left plot).
Figure 3: Average test power and type I error on HDGM dataset. Left: results with the same samplesize (4000) and different data dimensions. Right: results with the same sample dimension (10) anddifferent sample sizes. Our method (H-Div, dashed line) achieve better test power for almost everysetup. In particular, when the data dimension is small, all tests have high test power. Our methodscales better with data dimension and shows an advantage for higher dimensional problems.
Figure 4: Example plots of H-divergence across different geographical locations for losses ` relatedto agriculture (left) and energy production (right). Darker color indicates larger H-divergence. Com-pared to divergences such as KL, H-divergence measures changes relevant to different social andeconomic activities (by selecting appropriate loss functions `). For example, even though climatechange significantly impact the high latitude or high altitude areas, this change has less relevance toagriculture (because few agriculture activities are possible in these areas).
Figure 5: The divergence between corrupted image and original image measured by H-divergencevs. FID. For better comparison we normalize each distance to between [0, 1] by a linear transforma-tion. For “speckle” and “impulse” corruption, both divergences are monotonically increasing withmore corruption. For “snow” corruption H-divergence is monotonic while FID is not. Other typesof corruptions are provided in Appendix B.
Figure 6: The same plot as Figure 2, but with Parzen density estimator and different hyper-parameters (with 30 random runs rather than 10). The conclusion is identical to Figure 2.
Figure 7: Additional plots that extend Figure 5.
