Figure 1: Meta-evaluation accuracy across 3 seed runs on the novel tasks along meta-training. Left:compares B OMLA to the baselines, centre: compares B OMVI to the baselines, right: comparesB OMLA with different λ values to B OMVI.
Figure 2: Meta-evaluation accuracy across 3 seed runs on each dataset along meta-training (referto Figure 3 for the enlarged version). Higher accuracy values indicate better results with lessforgetting as we proceed to new datasets. B OMLA with λ = 100 gives good performance in the off-diagonal plots (retains performances on previously learned datasets), and has a minor performancetrade-off in the diagonal plots (learns less well on new datasets). Sequential MAML gives betterperformance in the diagonal plots (learns well on new datasets) but worse performance in the off-diagonal plots (forgets previously learned datasets). B omVI is also able to retain performance onprevious datasets, although it may be unable to perform as good as B omLA due to sampling andestimator variance.
Figure 3:	Meta-evaluation accuracy across 3 seed runs on each dataset along meta-training. Higheraccuracy values indicate better results with less forgetting as we proceed to new datasets. B omLAwith λ = 100 gives better performance in the off-diagonal plots (retains performances on previouslylearned datasets), and has a minor performance trade-off in the diagonal plots (learns less well onnew datasets). Sequential MAML gives better performance in the diagonal plots (learns well onnew datasets) but worse performance in the off-diagonal plots (forgets previously learned datasets).
Figure 4:	Meta-evaluation accuracy across 3 seed runs on each dataset along meta-training. Higheraccuracy values indicate better results with less forgetting as we proceed to new datasets. B omLAwith a large λ = 1000 gives better performance in the off-diagonal plots (retains performances onpreviously learned datasets) but worse performance in the diagonal plots (does not learn well on newdatasets). A small λ = 1 gives better performance in the diagonal plots (learns well on new datasets)but worse performance in the off-diagonal plots (forgets previously learned datasets). BomVI is alsoable to retain performance on previous datasets, although it may be unable to learn new datasets asgood as B omLA due to sampling and estimator variance.
