Figure 1: Renderings taken from real-time simulations of the elastic deformation of a helix fallingdown on the ground plane (left) and two rods colliding with each other (right).
Figure 2: Illustration of the discretization of a single rod using several rod segments arranged alongits centerline (left). Each rod segment is described by its position and orientation within the gener-alized coordinates pi . The Lagrange multipliers λi represent the interaction between rod segments.
Figure 3: Illustration of our approach incorporating a network which consists of M graph networks(GN-blocks) into the position-based dynamics framework.
Figure 4: Illustration of the ratio of COPINGNet’s inference time tinfer and the vanilla CG solver’srun time tCG (purple curves; right vertical axis) for the initially straight bending rod (left) and theelastic helix (right) simulations. The black curves show the CG iteration number ratio while the redcurves show the total speedup of the constraint projection when taking into account COPINGNet’sinference time (left vertical axis). The pink curves show the total speedup of the entire simulations.
Figure 5: Realistic biomechanical simulation of a 3D tree model composed of over 1k nodesswaying in a wind field. Our GN approach performs correctly even under a large number of rodsegments while increasing performance of the original PBD method.
Figure 6: The dashed horizontal lines show the benchmark CG solver’s constant performance for aninitially straight bending rod simulation (left) and an elastic helix simulation (right). The parametersφo =0°, N = 30, ' = 3.0 m, Y = 1.0 ∙ 105 Pa (left), and HR = 0.5 m, HH = 0.5 m, HW = 2.5,G = 1.0 ∙ 105 Pa, N = 60 (right) are applied. We are comparing our COPINGNet-assisted PBDapproach (orange) to a simplified version in which the k-NN (green) is used to predict the initialguess. Moreover (left), we added a performance measurement in which we restricted the solution tobe in a two-dimensional plane (black). The results are averages over 20 simulations and smoothedwith a window of 10 frames. The dashed vertical lines mark the number of 50 frames contained inthe training data set. For the helix simulation we observe a speed up of approximately 50% evenbeyond the training data (50 time frames). For the bending rod simulation we observe a speedupthat further decreases with increasing time frame number.
Figure 7: Illustration of the relativechange of the total rod length (l/l0)for different values of Young’s moduli(Y). Colored lines show different re-sults for COPINGNet replacing the con-straint projection. The thick black linerepresent the result for COPINGNet re-placing only the initial guess. This indi-cates that the end-to-end approach doesnot generalize past the 50 time stepsused in preparing the training data.
Figure 8: Illustration of the temporal evolution of scenarios (a) to (d) for the initially straight bendingrod, and (e) to (f) for the elastic helix. The different cases represent various material propertyconfigurations.
Figure 9: Illustration of the temporal evolution of a knot scenario. The rod is fixed at both endsand the knot is pulled tight. The predicted results by end-to-end COPINGNet-based learning areshown in red while the results computed with COPINGNet-assisted PBD are shown in black. Thevisualization of the last frame contains a close-up to demonstrate that the knot structure is stillpreserved. The rod parameters are N = 110, R = 0.01 m, ' = 11.0 m, and Y = T =1.0 ∙ 104 Pa.
Figure 10: Illustration of the temporal evolution of bending rod (upper row) and elastic helix (lowerrow) scenarios simulated using our COPINGNet-assisted PBD approach (blue curves), vanilla PBD(orange dotted curves), k-NN-based end-to-end learning (purple curves) and GN-based end-to-endlearning (green curves). While the COPINGNet-assisted approach and the vanilla PBD solver allowus to simulate both cases in a stable manner, both end-to-end learning approaches diverge withincreasing time due to error accumulation.
Figure 11: Illustration of the positions’ normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) comparedto vanilla PBD using our COPINGNet-assisted PBD approach (blue curves), k-NN-based end-to-end learning (purple curves), and GN-based end-to-end learning (green curves) for the bendingrod (left) and the elastic helix (right) scenarios. While the COPINGNet-assisted PBD approachconverges to an almost correct solution, both end-to-end learning approaches show large error rateswith increasing time frame number.
Figure 12: Illustration of the evaluation of COPINGNet's architecture (blue: benchmark architec-ture). The result is averaged from 50 test simulations each running for 100 time steps.
