Figure 1: Deployment of the MRTA policy model based on the CAMarchitecture. a) Robot-1 at to. b) Robot-2 at tι; here, the CAM outputfor previously selected task (e.g., task 2 in (b)) is set at 0.
Figure 2: The architecture of the context, en-coder and decoder for CAM.
Figure 3: SamPle scenario showing de-Pot location (red star) and task locations(squares) colored by their time dead-lines.
Figure 4: Convergence plot comparing CAM andAM for 200 epochstaken by AM to converge, CAM reached the best cost value of AM only after 7 epochs and reachedits final converged value in 35 epochs. These results clearly demonstrate the better sample efficiencyof our proposed method, CAM, in comparison to AM. As described later the computational cost ofeach epoch for our CAM method is also 〜2 minutes smaller than that of the AM method. Overall,our proposed approach reaches better cost function values significantly faster in terms of number oftraining epochs, with the benefits being more pronounced in terms of wall time. The higher cost ofAM could be in part attributed to directly implementing the encoding architecture of a transformernetwork (Vaswani et al. (2017)); this transformer mechanism was designed for machine translationand thus consists of multiple layers of Multi-head attention computations with a feed-forward struc-ture. In contrast, our CAM model uses simple linear transformations of the node properties and itsrelative differences in local neighborhoods to capture structural information. Thus the total numberof learnable parameters in AM (almost 393600 weights) is significantly larger than that in our CAMarchitecture (almost 17400 weights), leading to slower convergence of the former.
Figure 5: Generalizability analysis: The per-formance of the algorithms over 100 unseentest case scenarios. Each scenario includes 200tasks and the swarm size is set at 20 robots.
Figure 6: Varying task size for a 20-robotswarm: The performance of the CAM, and AMalgorithms over varying task size for 100 un-seen test case scenarios per task size. The solidline shows the mean value and the shaded areashows the 95% confidence interval. The dashedgray line shows the threshold value of 0, whereany cost below of this line means a 100% com-pletion rate.
