Figure 1: Spatial firing patterns of grid cells. (a) The firing pattern of a specific grid cellfrom the neuroscience experiment (data from http://www.ntnu.edu/kavli/research/grid-cell-data). (b)First column, schematic of grid cell (green circle), being defined by spa-tial scale, phase and orientation. The next three columns, three grid cells (green, orange and bluecircle) with different spatial scales, phases and orientations.
Figure 2: Continuous attractor network (CAN)-based grid cell modeling. (a)Schematic of lo-cal, excitatory weighted connections between grid cells. Darker color means stronger connec-tion. (b)Spatial representation redundancy in CAN. Each column illustrates the heat map of allgrid cells’ activity at the same time in a CAN. For each heat map, taking grid cells covered by asemi-transparent panel as a unit, they will always have the same activity as grid cells in other units.
Figure 3: Exploration of the agent in 2D space. (a) The agent’s random exploration in a 25m2 area(orange line) and place cells (grey circles) uniformly covering the whole area. (b) Multi-scale spatialactivity maps of grid cells. (c) Spatial activity maps of place cells.
Figure 4: Grid firing patterns in 3D space. (a) Multi-scale spatial activity maps of grid cells. (b)Spatial activity maps of place cells.
Figure 5: Grid coding performance analysis based on different grid scales in 3D space. (a) The phasedistribution of sub-RNNs with different scales. (b) The agent,s exploring trajectory in a 125m3 area.
Figure 6: Grid coding performance analysis based on different phase distributions in 3D space.
Figure 7: Path integration in 2D space. (a) A 25m2 area with place cells uniformly covered duringthe experiment. Self-location decoded from our model (varying colors) resembles the actual path(black). (b) Top, firing fields of five place cells. Bottom, the corresponding predictive results fromour model.
Figure 8: Path planning of grid cells in 3D space.(a),(b) Similar to Figure 7As shown in Figure 7 (a), with 625 place cells uniformly covering the working area, 9 trajectoriesare simulated. the black lines represent the ground truth and colored lines demonstrate the predictedresults. Figure 7 (b) illustrates the ground truth activity of five place cells and the decoding resultsfrom our model. The spatial locations and the corresponding place cells can be rightly predicted.
Figure 9: Analysis about grid cells’ metric ability. (a) Histogram showing the numbers of placecells needed for spatial representation in 2D and 3D spaces. (b) Schematic of the connection patternbetween grid cells and place cells. (c) Top, the spatial activity maps of five grid cells with differentspatial scales in our 2D grid cell model. Bottom, the connection pattern between the five grid cellsto all place cells.
Figure 10: Grid coding performance analysis based on different grid scales in 2D space. (a) Thephase distribution of sub-RNNs with different scales. (b) The agent’s exploring trajectory in a 25m2area. (c) Histogram showing accumulated coding error of each sub-RNN after path integrationfollowing the simulation trajectory in (b). (d) The comparison between the coding result derivedfrom our model and the ground truth activity of the selected grid cells in (a).
Figure 11: Grid coding performance analysis based on different phase distributions in 2D space.
