Figure 1: Comparison of several learning settings with offline computation in the orange boxesand online computation in the green boxes, with tailoring in blue. For meta-tailoring training,τ(θ, Ltailor, x) = arg minθ0≈θ Ltailor(x, θ0) represents the tailoring process resulting in θx. Althoughtailoring and meta-tailoring are best understood in supervised learning, they can also be applied inreinforcement learning, as shown in section 5.3.
Figure 2: Optimization at prediction time on theplanet data; each path going from right to left aswe minimize the physics tailoring loss. We usea small step size to illustrate the path. Tailoringand the two baselines share only differ in theirtest-time computations, thus sharing their starts.
Figure 3: Percentage of points with certificate above different radii, and average certified radius(ACR) for on the ImageNet dataset. Meta-tailoring improves the Average Certification Radius by5.1%, 13.8%, 19.6% respectively. Results for Cohen et al. (2019) are taken from Zhai et al. (2020).
Figure 4: Meta-tailoring improves the performanceof MBRL in dclaw, a complex manipulation prob-lem, especially for low-data regimes where thetransition model is imperfect and the prior is thususeful. We plot one confidence interval for the me-dian reward bootstrapped from 16 different runsper configuration. Further increasing the tailoringlearning rate results in (meta-)training instabilitiesbecause the inner loop is highly variable.
Figure 5: Decision boundary of our model at multiple levels of robustness on an example from Ilyaset al. (2019).
Figure 6:	Percentage of points with certificate above different radii, and average certified radius(ACR) for on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Meta-tailoring improves the Average Certification Radius by8.6%, 10.4%, 19.2% respectively. Results for Cohen et al. (2019) are taken from Zhai et al. (2020)because they add more measures than the original work, with similar results.
Figure 7:	Percentage of points with certificate above different radii, and average certified radius(ACR) for on the CIFAR-10 dataset, comparing with SOA methods. In contrast to pretty competitiveresults in ImageNet, meta-tailoring improves randomized smoothing, but not enough to reach SOA.
Figure 8:	Percentage of points with certificate above different radii, and average certified radius(ACR) for on the ImageNet dataset, including other SOA methods. Randomized smoothing withmeta-tailoring are very competitive with other SOA methods, including having the biggest ACR forσ = 1.
