Figure 1: Developer adjustments from the perspective of hyperparameter optimization.
Figure 2: Example search space decomposition for a hyperparameter addition and removal.
Figure 3:	Speedup to reach a given reference objective value compared to GP/TPE for best-first,best-first combined with transfer GP/TPE, and transfer GP/TPE (from left to right in each violintriplet) across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of benchmark geometric means. Thehorizontal line in each violin shows the geometric mean across these benchmark means. #Evaluationsfor the old HPO increases from left to right. The x-axis shows the budget for the GP and TPEreference. Note that the GP and TPE runs we used to determine the reference objective are differentto the ones that we show the speedups over.
Figure 4:	Percent of runs that do not reach the reference objective for the GP based drop-unimporantand only-optimize-new. Each data point for the violins represents the mean percentage of failures fora benchmark. The line in each violin shows the mean across these benchmark means. #Evaluationsfor the old HPO increases from left to right. The x-axis shows the budget for the GP reference.
Figure 5:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations here.
Figure 6:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPOhas a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 7:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPOhas a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 8:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations here.
Figure 9:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPOhas a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 10:	Speedup compared to GP for best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP, and transferGP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPOhas a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 11:	Failure rates for best-first, GP, and transfer GP (from left to right in each violin triplet)across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of the task means. The horizontal line in eachviolin shows the mean across these task means. The plots from left to right utilize increasing budgetfor the pre-adjustment hyperparameter. The x-axis shows the budget for the GP reference.
Figure 12:	Failure rates for best-first, TPE, and transfer TPE (from left to right in each violin triplet)across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of the task means. The horizontal line in eachviolin shows the mean across these task means. The plots from left to right utilize increasing budgetfor the pre-adjustment hyperparameter. The x-axis shows the budget for the GP reference.
Figure 13:	Failure rates for the TPE based drop-unimportant and only-optimize-new across 8benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of the task means. The horizontal line in each violinshows the mean across these task means. The plots from left to right utilize increasing budget for thepre-adjustment hyperparameter. The x-axis shows the budget for the GP reference.
Figure 14:	Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP,and transfer GP (from left to right in each violin triplet) over GP across 8 benchmarks. The violinsestimate densities of the benchmark means. The horizontal line in each violin shows the mean acrossthese benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPO increases from left to right. In each plot, theevaluation budget increases.
Figure 15: Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP,and transfer GP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations.
Figure 16: Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP,and transfer GP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 17: Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer GP,and transfer GP (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 18:	Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer TPE,and transfer TPE (from left to right in each violin triplet) over GP across 8 benchmarks. The violinsestimate densities of the benchmark means. The horizontal line in each violin shows the mean acrossthese benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPO increases from left to right. In each plot, theevaluation budget increases.
Figure 19:	Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer TPE,and transfer TPE (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations.
Figure 20:	Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer TPE,and transfer TPE (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 21:	Standardized objective improvements of best-first, best-first combined with transfer TPE,and transfer TPE (from left to right in each violin triplet) across tasks for each of 8 benchmarks. Theprevious HPO has a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 22:	Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant overGP across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of the benchmark means. The horizontalline in each violin shows the mean across these benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPOincreases from left to right. In each plot, the evaluation budget increases.
Figure 23:	Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations.
Figure 24:	Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 25:	Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 26:	Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant overTPE across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of the benchmark means. The horizontalline in each violin shows the mean across these benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPOincreases from left to right. In each plot, the evaluation budget increases.
Figure 27: Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 10 evaluations.
Figure 28: Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 20 evaluations.
Figure 29: Standardized objective improvements of only-optimize-new and drop-unimportant acrosstasks for each of 8 benchmarks. The previous HPO has a budget of 40 evaluations.
Figure 30: Speedup of GP1 over GP2 across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of thebenchmark geometric means. The horizontal line in each violin shows the geometric mean acrossthese benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPO increases from left to right. The x-axis showsthe budget for the GP reference.
Figure 31:	Speedup of TPE1 over TPE2 across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimate densities of thebenchmark geometric means. The horizontal line in each violin shows the geometric mean acrossthese benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPO increases from left to right. The x-axis showsthe budget for the TPE reference.
Figure 32:	Speedup of GP and TPE over random search across 8 benchmarks. The violins estimatedensities of the benchmark means. The horizontal line in each violin shows the geometric meanacross these benchmark means. #Evaluations for the old HPO increases from left to right. The x-axisshows the budget for the GP reference.
