Figure 1: Examples of attacks on a CNN trained over MNIST (top left), a CNN trained over EMNIST (top right),an LSTM for handwritten numbers (center), and Tesseract for typed words (bottom). The images correspond to,from left to right, the original image, the outputs of SCAR, VANILLA-SCAR, POINTWISE, and SIMBA. Thepredicted labels are in light gray below each image. For Tesseract attacks (bottom), we show the original imageand SCAR S output-example, we first proceed with an untargeted attack on both FC and FL using SCAR, which returnsimage xu with reduced confidence in the true amount y. Then we choose the target amount yt to bethe amount i with the maximum value min(FC(Xu)i, FL (Xu)i), since our goal is to attack both FCand FL. Then we run T- S car, which is the targeted version of Scar, twice to perform targetedattacks on both FC and FL over image Xu .
Figure 2: Success rate by L0 distance and number of queries for a CNN model on MNIST, a LeNet5 model onEMNIST, an LSTM model on handwritten numbers, and Tesseract over printed words.
Figure 3: An example of a check for $401 attacked by Algorithm 3 that is misclassified with high confidence as$701 by a check processing system used by US banks.
Figure 4: Success rate by L0 distance and by number of queries for four different models on MNIST.
Figure 6: Examples of attacks on the LSTM for handwritten numbers. The images correspondto, from left to right, the original image, the outputs of Scar, Vanilla- S car, Pointwise, andSimBA.
Figure 5: Success rate by L0 distance and by number of queries for four different models on EMNIST.
Figure 7: The gain from each pixel for the five iterations it took to successfully attack the word “idle”on Tesseract.
Figure 8: Heatmap of the gains from flipping a pixel on the word “idle” with Tesseract.
Figure 9: First digit and word of the CAR and LAR amount of checks for $562, $72, and $2misclassified as $862, $92, and $3 by a check processing system. The pixels in red correspond topixels whose colors differ between the original and attacked image.
