Figure 1: An example of the coverage properties for two methods of uncertainty quantification. Inthis scenario, each model produces an uncertainty interval for each xi which attempts to cover thetrue yi , represented by the red points. Coverage is calculated as the fraction of true values containedin these regions, while the width of these regions is reported in terms of multiples of the standarddeviation of the training set yi values.
Figure 2: An example of the corruptions in CIFAR-10-C. The 16 different corruptions have 5 dis-crete levels of shift, of which 3 are shown here. The same corruptions were applied to ImageNet toform the ImageNet-C dataset.
Figure 4: The effect of translation shifts on coverage andremains robust across all pixel shifts, while width increaseswidth in CIFAR-10 images. CoverageIn Figure 3, we observe the same coverage-width pattern at the lowest level of shift, 2 pixels. Allmethods have at least 0.95 coverage, but only SVI has a distinct jump in the average width of itsprediction set. The average width of the prediction set increases slightly then plateaus for all methodsbut SVI as the amount of translation increases.
Figure 3: The effect of rotation and translation on coverage and width, respectively, for MNIST.
Figure 5: The effect of corruption intensity on coverage levels vs. width in CIFAR-10-C. Each facetpanel represents a different corruption level, while points are the coverage of a model on one of 16corruptions. Each facet has 80 points per method, since 5 iterations were trained per method. Formethods with points at the same coverage level, the superior method is to the left as it has a lowerwidth.
Figure 6: The effect of corruption intensity on coverage levels vs. width in ImageNet-C. Each facetpanel represents a different corruption level, while points are the coverage of a model on one of 16corruptions. Each facet has 16 points per method, as only only 1 iteration was trained per method.
Figure A1: The effect of corruption intensity on coverage levels in CIFAR-10. This is averaged over16 different corruption types. As shift intensity increases, coverage decreases and width increases.
Figure A2: The effect of corruption intensity on coverage levels in ImageNet. This is averaged over16 different corruption types. As shift intensity increases, coverage decreases and width increases.
