Figure 1: The two training stages for modeling physical dynamics using transformers. (Left to right)The embedding model is first trained using Koopman based dynamics. The embedding model is thenfrozen (fixed), all training data is embedded and the transformer is trained in the embedded space.
Figure 2: The transformer decoder model used for the prediction of physical dynamics.
Figure 3: Example of a Koopman embedding for a two-dimensional system using a convolutionencoder-decoder model. The encoder model, F, projects the physical states into the approximateKoopman observable embedding. The decoder model, G recovers the physical states from the em-bedding.
Figure 4: Four test case predictions using the transformer model for 320 time-steps.
Figure 5: (a) Lorenz solution of 25k time-steps. (b) The Lorenz map produced by each model. (c)The test relative mean-squared-error (MSE) with respect to time.
Figure 6: Vorticity, ω = Vx Uy — Vy Ux, of two test case predictions using the proposed transformerwith Koopman embeddings at Reynolds numbers 233 (top) and 633 (bottom).
Figure 7: Test set relative mean-squared-error (MSE) of the base-line convolutional LSTM model(ConvLSTM) and transformers with Koopman (KM), auto-encoder (AE) and PCA embedding meth-ods over time.
Figure 8: u volume plots of the target (top) and transformer prediction (bottom) for a test case of theGray-SCott system. Isosurfaces displayed span the range U = [0.3,0.5] to show the inner structure.
Figure 9: Fully-connected embedding network with ReLU activation functions for the Lorenz sys-tem.
Figure 10: 2D convolutional embedding network with ReLU activation functions for the flow arounda cylinder system consisting of 5 convolutional encoding/decoding layers. Each convolutional oper-ator has a kernel size of (3, 3). In the decoder, the feature maps are up-sampled before applying astandard convolution. Additionally, two auxiliary fully-connected networks are used to predict thediagonal and off-diagonal elements of the Koopman operator for each viscosity ν .
Figure 11: 3D convolutional embedding network with leaky ReLU activation functions for the Gray-Scott system. Batch-normalization used between each of the convolutional layers. In the decoder,the feature maps are up-sampled before applying a standard 3D convolution.
Figure 12: Three Lorenz test case predictions using each tested model for 128 time-steps.
Figure 13: Lorenz test case predictions using the transformer model for 320 time-steps.
Figure 14: Comparison between the clean and contaminated (noisy) training data.
Figure 15: Velocity magnitude predictions of a test case at Re = 633 using each tested model.
Figure 16: Pressure predictions of a test case at Re = 633 using each tested model.
Figure 17: The dynamics of the fluid floW around a cylinder projected onto the 8 most dominateeigenvectors of the learned Koopman operator, K , in the embedding model.
Figure 18: Test case volume plots for the Gray-SCott system. Isosurfaces displayed span the rangeu, v = [0.3, 0.5] to show the inner structure.
Figure 19: Test case volume plots for the Gray-Scott system. Isosurfaces displayed span the rangeu, v = [0.3, 0.5] to show the inner structure.
Figure 20: X - y plane contour plots of three Gray-SCott test cases sliced at Z = 16.
