Figure 1: (a) Overview of the proposed ensemble searching framework. (b) An illustration of the transfor-mation procedure from a decided action sequence en,T to a macro ensemble e. The entire transformationprocedure consists of two steps. The first step segments en,T based on a maximum length k of each macro andforms e. The second step eliminates actions whose values are null in e.
Figure 2: A motivational example for demonstrating the synergism property in Seaquest. The top barshows a clip of the trajectory captured in Seaquest. The green color represents three consecutive UP macro, thered color represents (UP, LEFT, RIGHT) macro, and the blue one represents three consecutive FIRE macro.
Figure 3: Comparison of the macro action ensembles constructed by our method and IEB. The red and theblue learning curves correspond to the agents trained with the macro ensembles constructed by our methodologyand IEB, respectively. The results of the remaining environments are summarized in the appendix.
Figure 4: Comparison of the macro ensembles constructed by our methodology and the decoupled macroactions. For each environment, the red curve represents the performance of the agent trained with the macroensemble constructed by our methodology, while the curves in other colors represent the performance corre-sponding to the individual macros decoupled from this macro ensemble. For each case, the red curve growsfaster and ends up with a higher performance than the other curves. These results validate the existence of thesynergism property of our macro ensembles. Additional results can be referred in the appendix.
Figure 5: Comparison of the macro ensembles constructed by IEB and the decoupled macro actions. Foreach environment, the red curve represents the performance of the agent trained with the macro ensembleconstructed by IEB, while the curves in other colors represent the performance corresponding to the individualmacro actions decoupled from this macro ensemble. For each case, the red curve ends up with a lowerperformance than the best curve. The results reveal that the macro ensembles constructed by IEB may notpossess the synergism property. Additional experimental results can be referred in the appendix.
