Figure 1: Schematic summary of main results. Easy negatives are unnecessary and insufficient (green) andare more often dissimilar (i.e., in unrelated ImageNet classes) to the query (light blue) compared to hardernegatives. Hard (but not the very hardest) negatives were necessary and sufficient (orange) and are more oftensemantically similar to the query compared to easier negatives. The very hardest negatives are unnecessary andsometimes detrimental and also are more often in the same class as the query, compared to easier negatives(red). This is an illustrative schematic; images and trees are not from ImageNet.
Figure 2: Easy negatives are neither necessary nor sufficient, while hard negatives are both necessaryand sufficient. a-b) Top-1 (a) and Top-5 (b) performance of networks trained on only segments of 5% ofnegatives ordered by difficulty. For example, 95-100% means that only the top 5% hard negatives were usedfor training. c-d) Top-1 (c) and top-5 (d) performance of networks trained on increasingly larger fractions ofthe easiest negatives. Error bars are standard deviation across 3 seeds.
Figure 3: The hardest 0.1% of negatives hurt, especially at lower temperatures. Top-1 (a) and top-5 (b)accuracy of networks trained on all but hard and hardest negatives, at different temperatures. The baselinetemperature is 0.2.
Figure 4:	Semantic similarity is higher for the 5% of hard negatives than for the 95% of easy negativesProportion of shared labels (higher is more similar) (a) and WordNet distance as depth of least common ancestor(lower is more similar) (b) for the 5% of hard negatives and the 95% of easy negatives. Error bars are standarddeviation on plot values across 3 seeds.
Figure 5:	Semantic similarity with query increases with easier negatives, for the easy half of negativesSimilarity, as measured by proportion of shared labels (higher is more similar) (a) and depth of least commonancestor in WordNet tree (higher is more similar) (b) increases with easier negatives, for the easy half ofnegatives. Similarity also increases with negative difficulty for the harder half of negatives. Average negativedistance is negative for the easy half of negatives (c). Error bars are standard deviation on plot values across 3seeds (for b and c, error bars are so small that they are not visible).
Figure 6: There exist negatives that areconsistently harder or easier than ex-pected by chance. Distribution of nega-tives based on the proportion of positives forwhich a negative is in the hardest 5% for thereal data (blue) compared to the distributionobtained by shuffling the negatives for eachquery (orange).
