Figure 1: Comparison with different feature upsampling and enhancement methods on the layout-to-image translation task. Given two locations l0 (indicated by red and megenta squares) in the outputfeature map f0, our goal is to generate these locations by selectively upsampling several pointsN (l, k) (indicated by circles) in the input feature map f .
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed SA-UpSample, which consists of two branches, i.e., SAKGand SAFU. SAKG branch aims to generate semantically-adaptive kernels according to the inputlayout. SAFU branch aims to selectively upsample the feature f ∈C ×H ×W to the target onef0∈C×Hs×Ws based on the kernels learned in SAKG, where s is the expected upsample scale.
Figure 3: Visualization of learned Semanticany-adaptive kernels on COCO-Stuff. In each row, Weshow three representative locations with different color squares in the generated image. The otherthree images are learned semantically-adaptive kernels for those three locations, with correspond-ing color arrows summarizing the most-attended regions for upsampling the target location. Weobserve that the network learns to allocate attention according to regions within the same semanticinformation, rather than just spatial adjacency.
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on Cityscapes and Facades. From left to right: Input, CC-FPSE (Liu et al., 2019), GauGAN (Park et al., 2019), GauGAN+SA-UpSample (Ours), and GT.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison on DeepFashion and CelebAMask-HQ. From left to right: Input,GauGAN (Park et al., 2019), GauGAN+SA-UpSample (Ours), and GT.
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison on ADE20K and COCO-Stuff. From left to right: Input, CC-FPSE (Liu et al., 2019), GauGAN (Park et al., 2019), GauGAN+SA-UpSample (Ours), and GT.
Figure 7: (a) Visualization of generated semantic maps compared with those from GauGAN (Parket al., 2019) on Cityscapes. Most improved regions are highlighted in the ground truths with whitedash boxes. (b) Comparison in a zoomed-in manner on CelebAMask-HQ.
Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of different upsampling methods on Cityscapes. Key differencesare highlighted by red boxes.
Figure 9: Exemplar applications of the proposed method on different datasets.
