Figure 1: A toy experiment. We train multiple models on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) using differentaugmentation schemes. Each scheme is based on a single basic image transformation type and enhanced byoverlaying random instantiations of the transformation for each input image following Hendrycks et al. (2019).
Figure 2: (a) Schematic comparison of MMD to MSD. MMD measure between distribution centers and is onlysmall if the augmentation overlaps with a corruption. MSD measures to the nearest sampled point in set ofsamples (marked by a star), and is small even for broad distributions that overlap with multiple corruptions. (b)We test on images corruption with impulse noise, and train on images augmented with a mixture of impulsenoise and motion blur. As the mixing fraction of impulse noise decreases, MMD between the augmentation andcorruption grows linearly while MSD and error stay low until nearly 0% mixing fraction.
Figure 3: Example relationships between MSD and corruption error for different corruptions. ρ is the Spearmanrank correlation. MSD correlates well with error across all four categories of corruption in CIFAR-10-C.
Figure 4: Example relationships between base augmentations and corruptions. Including ‘solarize’ reducesMSD on the perceptually similar impulse noise corruption, while including x translation reduces MSD on theperceptually similar motion blur corruption. MSD is not decreased for dissimilar augmentation-corruption pairs.
Figure 5: Example correlations for augmentation schemes from the literature. Patch Gaussian is similar tonoise, while AutoAugment is similar to contrast and blur, as expected from their formulation. Glass blur actsmore like a noise corruption than a blur for these augmentation schemes, likely because it randomly permutingpixels. *AugMix here refers to just the augmentation distribution in Hendrycks et al. (2019), not the proposedJensen-Shannon divergence loss, which gives additional improvements in corruption error.
Figure 6: Example CIFAR-10-C and ImageNet-C corruptions. While still human interpretable, new corruptionsare sampled to be dissimilar from CIFAR-10/ImageNet-C. Base images c Sehee Park and Chenxu Han.
Figure 7: (a) Patch Gaussian shows a low MMD distance on the noise corruptions and a high MMD distanceon every other corruption, suggesting that it overfits the noise corruptions. (b) While AutoAugment containscontrast and brightness augmentations, it is broad enough that it doesn’t have a low MMD to these corruptions.
Figure 8: Average corruption error on ImageNet-C as a function the size of a fixed subset of AugMix augmenta-tions. During training, augmentations are only sampled from the subset. The subset is chosen one of three ways:randomly, the most similar augmentations to ImageNet-C, or the least similar augmentations to ImageNet-C.
Figure 9: MSD vs corruption test error for which MSD is calculated using VGG-19-BN as the architecture forfeature extraction. The corruption error is still calculated using WideResNet-40-2. Compare to Figure 16 tosee that the qualitative structure of the correlation is the regardless of which architecture is used for the featureextractor.
Figure 10: The standard deviation of the distance between an augmentation and a corruption center, taken over100 resamplings of images and corruptions. The standard deviation is calculated as a percentage of the meandistance, then averaged over 100 augmentation-corruption pairs. At our choice of parameters, 100 images and100 corruptions, the standard deviation is only around 5% of the distance. This is smaller than the feature size inthe scatter plots of Figure 14To do so, we use the augmentation scheme from AugMix and corruptions distributions from CIFAR-10-C to randomly sample 100 augmentation-corruption pairs. Then, for different samplings of a fixednumber of images and sampled corruptions, we measure the augmentation-corruption distance in thetransform feature space 100 times for each augmentation-corruption pair. We calculate the standarddeviation of the distance as a percentage of the mean distance for each augmentation-corruptionpair, and average this over pairs. The results are shown in Figure 10. For our choice of image andcorruption number, the standard deviation in distance is only around 5% of the mean distance, whichis smaller than the size of the features in the scatter plots in Figure 14.
Figure 11: Examples of each corruption considered when building the dataset dissimilar to ImageNet-C. Baseimage c Sehee Park.
Figure 12: The nine base transforms used as augmentations in analysis. Base image c Sehee Park.
Figure 13: Examples of the 15 corruptions in the ImageNet-C corruption benchmark (Hendrycks & Dietterich,2018). Base image c Sehee Park.
Figure 14: Example relationships between augmentation-corruption distance and corruption error for twodistance scores, MMD and MSD. ρ is the Spearman rank correlation. MMD between an augmentation andcorruption distribution is not typically predictive of corruption error. MSD correlates well across all fourcategories of corruption in CIFAR-10-C.
Figure 15: See text for details.
Figure 16: A corruption,s average contribution to the distance to ImageNet-C, as a fraction of the population'sstandard deviation. The blue corruptions are those used to construct ImageNet-C.
