Figure 1: t-SNE visualizations (Maaten & Hinton (2008)) for the penultimate layer of 100 validationimages for each class in five models from Table 4 - Class data is plotted with a heat map with yellowrepresenting digit 0 and dark violet representing digit 9. Level of parameterization increases fromtop to bottom and the smoothing factor (σ) increases from left to right. Similar color tones of theheat map tend to cluster closer together as σ increases. For layers with greater than 50 nodes t-snewas run after PCA was used to lower the dimensionality of the data to 50.
Figure 2: Confusion matrices for varied σ for model 3-layer-0 from Table 4, σ increasing from leftto right and top to bottom. Top-left corresponds to σ = 0, the one-hot case, and the bottom rightcorresponds to σ = 0.8, the point at which raw accuracy drops off significantly. Note the model doesnot have the capacity to learn a reasonable raw accuracy, but it does have the capacity to minimizethe mse once the targets are smoothed.
Figure 3: Class distances in the penultimate layer according to the the NAA model - class distancesaccording to the cosine similarity metric defined in (6) were calculated for the final hidden layer inmodels trained on the MNIST dataset. The bottom row shows cos2 (yi , yj ) subtracted from one foreach of the target vectors, which could be considered a sort of ground truth orientations. Note thesimilarity between the cosine relationship in the target space and the class distance relationships inthe NAA model, particularly as both parameterization and σ increases. This in addition to findingsin Figure 2 give evidence that the smoothed relationships in the target space are easier to learn thanthe more orthogonal relationships such as in the one-hot case.
Figure 4: t-SNE visualizations of the penultimate layer for two groupings from Table 1 on CIFAR-10 models - (left) t-SNE for grouping1 and (right) grouping3 (semantic grouping) - note as σ in-creases the points tend to cluster into their superclusters while the differentation between subclassesdecreases.
