Figure 1: Copula families used in the mixture models in our framework. The percentage in theupper-left corner shows how often each of the families was selected to be used in a copula mixturefor pairwise relationships in the real neuronal data from Pakan et al. (2018a) (see Sec. 4).
Figure 3: Applications of the Copula-GP framework to neuronal and behavioral data from the visualcortex of awake mice. A Schematic of the experimental task (Pakan et al., 2018a; Henschke et al.,2020) in virtual reality (VR); B Example traces from ten example trials: x is a position in VR, yis a vector of neuronal recordings (blue) and behavioral variables (red); C-D Density plots for: thenoise correlation (C) and the behavioral modulation (D) examples; E-G Conditional entropy forthe bivariate examples (E-F) and the population-wide statistics (G); H Comparison of Copula-GPmethods (“estimated” and “integrated”) vs. non-parametric MI estimators on subsets of variables.
Figure A4: Accuracy of the entropy estimation for multivariate Gaussian distributions. A Entropy ofthe 20-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distribution for different correlation coefficients ρ. B Es-timation error for the entropy shown in A. C Entropy of the multivariate Gaussian distributions withρ = 0.99 and varying dimensionality. D Estimation error for the entropy shown in C.
Figure A5: Conditional entropy H(y|x) (left panel) and mutual information I(x, y) (right panel)measured by different methods on synthetic data, generated from Clayton copula. The performanceof various estimators is qualitatively similar to Fig. 2A with the Gaussian copula.
Figure A6: Toy model of two independent neurons with the same conditional firing rate: A averagefiring rate depending on X ; B raster plot with spike counts for one of the neurons; C simulatedcalcium traces from 10 trials for one of the neurons; D data-points projected onto a unit cube by theprobability integral transform based on unconditional marginals; colored points show joint neuraldata-point (Y0,Y1) recorded at X, where X is color-coded (as in A); the histogram on the rightshows conditional marginal distribution p(Y0|X > 0.5); E mixture model fit for the data in D(with unconditional marginals); F density plots comparing predictions of the mixture model (shades)with the actual data (black outlines); the fit is poor due to non-uniformity of empirical marginaldistributions; G same as D, but based on conditional marginals, estimated using fastKDE.
Figure A7: Parameters of the copula mixture models. From left to right: copula probability densities(same as Fig.3C-D); a list of selected copula elements; copula parameters θ; mixing concentrationsφ. These plots are provided for: A the noise correlation example; B the behavioral modulationexample.
