Figure 1: A visualization of the entropy maximization process. We illustrate the noise transitionmatrices of DILNs as heat maps. The intact CIFAR-10 dataset is used as the underlying clean dataset,and four noise models are considered (symmetric 20%/50%/80% noise and pairwise 45% noise),which are shown here as four pairs of columns. The first four rows depict heat maps for α-incrementDILNs, where α = (a, . . . , a) for four values a = 0.0, 0.6, 0.854, 0.877. The last row depicts heatmaps for baseline DILNs, which have expected maximum entropy. Note that the minimum value aminfor a, such that a discriminator would find α-increment DILNs “indistinguishable” from baselineDILNs, would depend on the base noise model that the α-increment DILN is derived from. Fromthis figure, we are able to infer, for example, that for symmetric noise models, amin ≈ 0.877 for basenoise level 50%, while in contrast, amin ≈ 0.854 for base noise level 80%. In general, different noiselevels correspond to different minimum values for α.
Figure 2: An overview of the proposed information-theoretic framework, using LID-based discrimi-nators as a concrete example. Given an input dataset D with instance-independent label noise, severalcollections of new datasets are synthesized from D. These synthesized datasets are “derived” viadifferent partial relabelings (and hence have different entropies). The synthesized datasets in eachcollection are further processed to create training data for a single discriminator. In this illustration,LID sequences from the synthesized datasets become the training data for each discriminator. Everydiscriminator generates a single intermediate estimate for the noise transition matrix QD . The finalestimate is computed as the mean of all intermediate estimates.
Figure 3: LID sequences visualization for clean CIFAR-10 intact as D (top plot) and clean CIFAR-10with 70% of anchor-like instances removed as D (bottom plot). The x-axis represents epochs, andthe y-axis represents individual LID scores (at each epoch). Notice that for each considered noiselevel a (corresponding to α = (a, . . . , a)), we have a coordinate-wise minimum-to-maximum rangeof the entries for sequences generated using α = (a, . . . , a), where these sequences associated to Dαare repeatedly generated using multiple random seeds. We call this coordinate-wise minimum-to-maximum range a ”band”. Blue bands represent LID sequences associated to α-increment DILNswith noise levels 0%, 60%, 80%, 85% and 87.8% (from lightest blue to darkest blue). Red bandsrepresent LID sequences associated to baseline DILNs.
