Figure 1:	Overview of STOVE’s architecture. (Center left) At time t, the input image xt is processedby an LSTM in order to obtain a proposal distribution over object states q(zt | xt). (Top) A separateproposal q(zt | zt-1) is obtained by propagating the previous state zt-1 using the dynamics model.
Figure 2:	(Left) Depiction of the graphical model underlying STOVE. Black arrows denotethe generative mechanism and red arrows the inference procedure. The variational distributionq(Zt | Zt-1, xt, xt-1) is formed by combining predictions from the dynamics model p(Zt | Zt-1)and the object detection network q(Zt | xt). For the RL domain, our approach is extended by actionconditioning and reward prediction. (Right) Components of Zto and corresponding variational distri-butions. Note that the velocities are estimated based on the change in positions between timesteps,inducing a dependency on xt-1.
Figure 3: Visualisation of object positions from the real environment and predictions made by ourmodel, SQAIR, and the supervised baseline, for the billiards and gravity environment after thefirst 8 frames were given. Our model achieves realistic behaviour, outperforms the unsupervisedbaselines, and approaches the quality of the supervised baseline, despite being fully unsupervised.
Figure 4: Mean test set performance of our model compared to baselines. Our approach (STOVE)clearly outperforms all unsupervised baselines and is almost indistinguishable from the superviseddynamics model on the billiards task. (Top) Mean squared errors over all pixels in the video pre-diction setting (the lower, the better). (Bottom) Mean Euclidean distances between predicted andtrue positions (the lower, the better). All position and pixel values are in [0, 1]. In all experiments,the first eight frames are given, all remaining frames are then conditionally generated. The shadingindicates the max and min values over multiple training runs with identical hyperparameters. (Bestviewed in color.)extracted object patches to the object state. While this patch-wise code could, in general, be obtainedusing some neural feature extractor, we achieved satisfactory performance by simply using the meanvalues per color channel when given colored input.
Figure 5: Comparison of the kinetic energies of the rollouts predicted by the models, computed basedon position differences between successive states. Only STOVE’s predictions reflect the conserva-tion of total kinetic energy in the billiards data set. This is a quantitive measure of the convincingphysical behavior in the rollout videos. (Left, center) Averages are over 300 trajectories from thetest set. Shaded regions indicate one standard deviation. STOVE correctly predicts trajectories withconstant energy, whereas SQAIR and DDPAE quickly diverge. (Right) Rolling average over a sin-gle, extremely long-term run. We conjecture that STOVE predicts physical behavior indefinitely.
Figure 6: Comparison of all models on sample efficiency and final performance. (Left) Meancumulative reward over 100 steps on the environment, averaged over 100 environments, using thespecified policy. The shaded regions correspond to one-tenth of a standard deviation. In additionto the training curves, two constant baselines are shown, one representing a random policy and onecorresponding to the MCTS based policy when using the real environment as a simulator. (Right)Final performance of all approaches, after training each model to convergence. The shaded regioncorresponds to one standard deviation. (Best viewed in color.)∙5∙0∙5∙0∙5∙0∙5∙0∙5∙00112233445----------8u6jmio" Jqje PJeMJ>eπmoAfter training each model to convergence, the final performance of all approaches is reported inFig. 6 (right). In this case, PPO achieves slightly better results, however it only converges aftertraining for approximately 4 000 000 steps, while our approach only uses 130 000 samples. Afteraround 1 500 000 steps, PPO does eventually surpass the performance of STOVE-based MCTS.
Figure 7: Reconstructions obtained from our image model when using more varied shapes.
Figure 8: Mean kinetic energy observed/predicted by STOVE over true energy of the sequences.
Figure 9: Displayed is the mean predicted position error over a rollout length of 8 frames astraining progresses for the billiards (left) and gravity (right) scenario for STOVE and its ablations.
