Figure 1: Cell topologies of popular NAS architectures. Each sub-figure has three sets of nodes fromleft to right, i.e., the input nodes, intermediate nodes, and output node. The arrows (i.e., operationsof the cell) represent the direction of information flow. The caption of each sub-figure reports thename of the architecture, width and depth of a cell following our definition. The width of a cell iscomputed with the assumption that all intermediate nodes share the same width c.
Figure 2: Topologies of DARTS (Liu et al., 2019) cell (leftmost) and its variants with randomconnections. The cell depth is increasing and width decreasing from left to right. In particular, theoriginal DARTS cell Cdarts is widest and shallowest among these cells.
Figure 3: Test loss and test accuracy (%) curves of DARTS and its randomly connected variants onCIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 during training. The default learning rate is 0.025.
Figure 4: Test accuracy (%) curves of DARTS and its randomly connected variants on CIFAR-10and CIFAR-100 during training under different learning rates (0.0025 and 0.25). We only evaluateCdarts, C1darts and C3darts for illustration. The caption of each sub-figure reports the dataset andthe learning rate.
Figure 5: Test accuracy (%) curves of DARTS, ENAS, AmoebaNet, NASNet and their randomvariants of operations on CIFAR-10 during training. The parameter size is attached in Table 3 ofAppendix B.2.
Figure 6: Loss contours of DARTS and its variants with random connections on the test dataset ofCIFAR-10. The lighter color of the contour lines indicates a larger loss. Notably, the loss of theblank area, around the corners of each plot, is extremely large. Besides, the area with denser contourlines indicates a steeper loss surface.
Figure 7: Heat maps of the gradient variance from DARTS and its randomly connected variantsaround the optimal on the test dataset of CIFAR-10. The lighter color indicates a larger gradientvariance. Notably, the gradient variance of the yellow area, around the corners of each plot, isextremely large. Obviously, the region with relatively small gradient variance becomes smaller fromleft to right.
Figure 8: 3D surfaces of the gradient variance from DARTS and its randomly connected variantsaround the optimal on the test dataset of CIFAR-100. The height of the surface indicates the value ofgradient variance. Notably, the height of the gradient variance surface is gradually increasing fromleft to right. Especially, Cdarts has the smoothest and lowest surface of gradient variance amongthese architectures.
Figure 9: Comparison of the test accuracy at the convergence between popular NAS architecturesand their randomly connected variants on CIFAR-10. Each popular NAS architecture (index 0 onthe x-axis) is followed by 13 randomly connected variants (from index 1 to index 13 on the x-axis),corresponding to C1 to C13 respectively. The width and depth of these random variants are shownin Table 2 in Appendix B.2. The dashed lines report the accuracy of the popular NAS architectures.
Figure 10: Connection topology of AmoebaNet cell (Real et al., 2019) and its part of randomlyconnected variants. Each sub-figure reports the width and depth of a cell separated by a comma.
Figure 11:	Connection topology of SNAS cell under mild constraint (Xie et al., 2019b) and its partof randomly connected variants. The width and depth of a cell are reported in the title of each plot.
Figure 12:	More test accuracy (%) curves of DARTS, ENAS, AmoebaNet, NASNet and their randomvariants of operations on CIFAR-10 during training.
Figure 13:	Test loss curves of DARTS and its variants on CIFAR-10 during training.
Figure 14:	Test loss curves of AmoebaNet and its variants on CIFAR-10 during training.
Figure 15:	Test loss curves of ENAS and its variants on CIFAR-10 suring training.
Figure 16:	Test loss curves of NASNet and its variants on CIFAR-10 suring training.
Figure 17:	Loss contours of DARTS and its variants with random connections on the test dataset ofCIFAR-10.
Figure 18: Loss contours of AmoebaNet and its randomly connected variants on the test dataset ofCIFAR-10.
Figure 19:	Loss contours of ENAS and its randomly connected variants on the test dataset of CIFAR-10.
Figure 20:	Loss contours of NASNet and its randomly connected variants on the test dataset ofCIFAR-10.
Figure 21: 3D surfaces of the gradient variance from AmoebaNet and its randomly connected vari-ants on the test dataset of CIFAR-10.
Figure 22: 3D surfaces of the gradient variance from DARTS and its randomly connected variantson the test dataset of CIFAR-10.
Figure 23: 3D surfaces of the gradient variance from ENAS and its randomly connected variants onthe test dataset of CIFAR-10.
Figure 24: 3D surfaces of the gradient variance from NASNet and its randomly connected variantson the test dataset of CIFAR-10.
Figure 25: Adapted topologies of cells from popular NAS architectures. The title of each sub-figureincludes the name of the architecture, width and depth of the cell following our definition. Notably,these cells achieve the largest width and smallest depth in their original search space.
Figure 26: Two architectures to compare in the theoretical analysis: (a) architecture with widest cell;(b) architecture with narrowest cell. The notation l and l denote the values of objective function fand f evaluated at input x respectively.
