Figure 1: A simplified overview of glider. ① glider utilizes Neural Interaction Detectionand LIME together to interpret feature interactions learned by a source black-box model at a datainstance, denoted by the large green plus sign.② glider identifies interactions that consistentlyappear over multiple data samples, then explicitly encodes these interactions in a target black-boxrecommender model frec .
Figure 2: Occurrence counts (Total: 1000)vs. rank of detected interactions from Au-toInt on Criteo and Avazu datasets. * indi-@ 2.00GHz server with 2 Nvidia 1080 Ti GPUs. The cates a higher-order interaction (details indetection results across datasets are shown in Figure 2 Appendix G).
Figure 3: Test logloss vs. K of DeepFMon the Criteo dataset (5 trials).
Figure 4: Qualitative examples (more in Appendix D & E)7Based on official code: https://github.com/marcotcr/lime9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020the figure, we see that the interactions form a single region or multiple regions of the image. Theyalso tend to be complementary to LIME’s main effects and are sometimes more informative. Forexample, the interpretations of the “shark” classification show that interaction detection finds theshark fin whereas main effects do not. Interpretations of Sentiment-LSTM are shown in Figure 4b,excluding common stop words (Appendix C). We again see the value of MADEX’s interactions, whichshow salient combinations of words, such as “never, fails”, “absolutely, no”, and “lacks, punch”.
Figure 5: The effects of varying the number of buckets on (a) on the average embedding size of crossfeatures involving dense features and (b) the individual embedding sizes of the same cross features.
Figure 6: Additional qualitative results, following Figure 4a, on random test images in ImageNet.
Figure 7:	Occurrence counts (total: 1000) vs. rank of interactions detected from AutoInt on (a)Criteo and (b) Avazu datasets. Each higher-order interaction is annotated with its interaction cardi-nality.
Figure 8:	Histograms of interaction sizes for interactions detected in (a) ResNet152 and (b)Sentiment-LSTM across 1000 random samples in respective test sets.
