Figure 1: Overview of CompGCN. Given node and relation embeddings, CompGCN performs acomposition operation φ(∙) over each edge in the neighborhood of a central node (e.g. ChristopherNolan above). The composed embeddings are then convolved with specific filters WO and WI fororiginal and inverse relations respectively. We omit self-loop in the diagram for clarity. The messagefrom all the neighbors are then aggregated to get an updated embedding of the central node. Also,the relation embeddings are transformed using a separate weight matrix. Please refer to Section 4for details.
Figure 3: Performance of CompGCN with dif-ferent number of relation basis vectors on link pre-diction task. We report the relative change in MRRon FB15k-237 dataset. Overall, CompGCN givescomparable performance even with limited parame-ters. Refer to Section 6.3 for details.
Figure 2: Knowledge Graph link prediction withCompGCN and other methods. CompGCN gener-ates both entity and relation embedding as opposedto just entity embeddings for other models. For moredetails, please refer to Section 6.2Effect of composition Operator: The results on link prediction with different composition oper-ators are presented in Table 4. We find that with DistMult score function, multiplication operator(Mult) gives the best performance while with ConvE, circular-correlation surpasses all other op-erators. Overall, we observe that more complex operators like circular-correlation outperform orperform comparably to simpler operators such as subtraction.
Figure 4: Comparison of CompGCN (B = 5) withR-GCN for pruned versions of Fb15k-237 datasetcontaining different number of relations. CompGCNwith 5 relation basis vectors outperforms R-GCNacross all setups. For more details, please refer to Sec-tion 6.3Figure 5: Performance of CompGCN with differ-ent number of relations on link prediction task. Wereport the relative change in MRR on pruned ver-sions of FB15k-237 dataset. Overall, CompGCNgives comparable performance even with limited pa-rameters. Refer to Section 6.3 for details.
Figure 5: Performance of CompGCN with differ-ent number of relations on link prediction task. Wereport the relative change in MRR on pruned ver-sions of FB15k-237 dataset. Overall, CompGCNgives comparable performance even with limited pa-rameters. Refer to Section 6.3 for details.
