Figure 1: Overview of our hybrid structure, which augments genetic algorithms with ML basedneural networks.
Figure 2: Reducing Fitness of o-terphenyl, initially possessing the largest fitness in generation 5(Rank = 0). Due to decreasing discriminator predictions D(m), fitness decreases with an increasedprobability of getting killed (Kill Prob.). The molecule is completely replaced in generation 16.
Figure 3: Maximum J(m) values found for 10 independent runs with no discriminator (β = 0) and5 independent runs with the introduction of a time-dependent adaptive penalty. The full line is theaverage of all runs, the shaded areas are the boundaries of all runs and the dashed lines denote theaverage of all maximal J(m) values found at any generation.
Figure 4: Classes of molecules explored by the GA.
Figure 5: Two-dimensional PCA of five time snapshots of the molecular space explored by theGA-D(t).
Figure 6: Distributions of logP and QED for a) ZINC and b) GuacaMol data set compared tomolecules generated using the GA. c) Examples of molecules generated by the GA with high logPand QED scores.
Figure 7: Variation of the model parameter β that weights the discriminator score in the overallfitness function. a) Average J(m) as a function of the generation. b) Average discriminator score asa function of the generation. c) Distributions of J(m) and discriminator score D for multiple valuesof β . d) Examples of molecules generated with β = 0 and β = 50.
Figure S1:	Molecular modifications resulting in increased penalized logP scores under similarityconstraint sim(m, m0) > 0.4, 0.6. We show the molecules that resulted in largest score improve-ment.
Figure S2:	Distributions of a) logP, b) SA, c) QED and d) molecular weight for randomly generatedSELFIES, molecules from the ZINC data set and molecules from the GuacaMol data set.
Figure S3:	Distributions of a) logP, b) SA, c) QED and d) molecular weight for GA generatedSELFIES (penalized logP objective function), molecules from the ZINC data set and molecules fromthe GuacaMol data set.
Figure S4:	Distributions of a) logP, b) SA, c) QED and d) molecular weight for GA generatedSELFIES (logP and QED as objective function), molecules from the ZINC data set and moleculesfrom the GuacaMol data set.
