Figure 1: Self-attention heatmaps from two different pre-trained LMs. (Left) A heatmap for theaverage of attention distributions from the 7th layer of the XLNet-base (Yang et al., 2019) modelgiven the sample sentence. (Right) A heatmap for the average of attention distributions from the 9thlayer of the BERT-base (Devlin et al., 2019) model given another sample sentence. We can easilyspot the chunks of words on the two heatmaps that are correlated with the constituents of the inputsentences, e.g., (Left) ‘the price of plastics’, ‘took off in 1987’, ‘Quantum Chemical Corp.’, (Right)‘when price increases can be sustained’, and ‘he remarks’.
Figure 2: The best layer-wise S-F1 scores of each LM instance on the PTB test set. (Left) Theperformance of the X-‘base’ models. (Right) The performance of the X-‘large’ models.
Figure 3: Self-attention heatmaps for the average of all attention distributions from the 7th layer ofthe XLNet-base model, given a set of input sentences.
Figure 4: The best layer-wise S-F1 scores of each LM instance on the MNLI test set. (Left) Theperformance of the X-‘base’ models. (Right) The performance of the X-‘large’ models.
Figure 5:	Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with the bias atthe bottom) for the sentence ‘These include a child-care initiative and extensions of soon-to-expiretax breaks for low-income housing and research-and-development expenditures’.
Figure 6:	Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with the biasat the bottom) for the sentence ‘But HOFI ‘s first offer would have given Ideal ’s other shareholdersabout 10 % of the combined company’.
Figure 7: Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with the biasat the bottom) for the sentence ‘It was Friday the 13th and the stock market plummeted nearly 200points’.
Figure 8: Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with the biasat the bottom) for the sentence ‘Until recently national governments in Europe controlled most ofthe air time and allowed little or no advertising’.
Figure 9: Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with the biasat the bottom) for the sentence ‘Nevertheless Ms. Garzarelli said she was swamped with phone callsover the weekend from nervous shareholders’.
Figure 10: Gold (top) and predicted trees (one without the bias in the middle, the other with thebias at the bottom) for the sentence ‘Analysts and competitors however doubt the numbers were thathigh’.
