Figure 1: Even though an anomaly is a local perturbation in the image (b), the whole VAE-reconstructed image can be disturbed (c). Our gradient descent-based method gives better qualityreconstructions (d).
Figure 2: Illustration of our method. We perform gradient descent on E(xt) to iteratively correctxt.
Figure 3: First row: Normal samples of hazelnut, grid, cable, wood, carpet and bottle categories inMVTec dataset; Second row: anomalous samples from the aforementioned dataset categories; Thirdrow: Anomaly segmentation with baseline L2 autoencoder (Bergmann et al., 2019); Fourth row:our proposed anomaly segmentation with L2 autoencoder augmented with gradient-based iterativereconstruction. Ground truth is represented by red contour, and each estimated segmentation by agreen overlay. It can be seen that anomaly segmentation is refined by our proposed method, with atendency of detecting less false positives.
Figure 4: Inpainting experiment performed on CelebA dataset, where the test face images aremasked with uniform noise. The baseline VAE reconstruction is disturbed by the noise mask, pro-viding a poor inpainting. The proposed gradient-based VAE provides a more convincing inpaintingby an iterative process.
Figure 5: Evolution of pixel-wise anomaly detection AUROC performance.
Figure 6: From left to right: Normal; Anomalous; Anomaly segmentation with baseline L2 autoen-coder (Bergmann et al., 2019); Our proposed anomaly segmentation with L2 autoencoder augmentedwith gradient-based iterative reconstruction.
Figure 7: Illustration of anomaly localization comparison over four baselines (L2AE, DSAE, VAE,γ-VAE). Ground truth is represented by red contour, and each estimated segmentation by a greenoverlay. It can be seen that anomaly segmentation is overall improved when different baselines areaugmented by our proposed gradient descent.
Figure 8: Inpainting comparison. Each batch is made of four rows, from top to bottom: Maskedinput image; VAE with arbitrary conditioning (VAEAC, Ivanov et al. (2019)); Ours; Ground truth.
Figure 9: Principle of the energy optimization to project anomalous sample on the normal manifoldFigure 9 illustrates our method principle. We start with a defective input x0 whose reconstructionXo does not necessarily lie on the normal data manifold. As the optimization process carries on, theoptimized sample x0 and its reconstruction look more similar and get closer to the manifold. Theregularization term of the energy function makes sure that the optimized sample stays close to theoriginal sample.
Figure 10: Distribution of the improvement rate over all presented baselines and all datasets inMVTec AD.
