Figure 1: Examples of order graphs, in which node n precedes node m (n → m), if n divides m. Forclarity, self-loops for reflexivity and edges deducible from transitivity are omitted from the graphs.
Figure 2: Illustration of the pairwise comparator, where c denotes concatenation.
Figure 3: Consistency computation in the MC rule: It is illustrated how to compute the sum in (5) fortwo candidates θ0 = 7 and 9. Each box represents a reference ym . There are 5 references for eachclass in {0, . . . , 14}. Comparison results are color-coded (yellow for x ym, gray for x ≈ ym, andgreen for X Y ym). The bold black rectangle encloses the references satisfying ∣θ0 一 θ(ym)∣ ≤ T,where τ = 4. The computed consistency φcon(x, ym , θ0) in (5) is written within the box. Forθ0 = 7, there are six inconsistent boxes. For θ0 = 9, there are 24 such boxes. In this example, θ0 = 7minimizes the inconsistency, or equivalently maximizes the consistency. Therefore, Θmc(x) = 7.
Figure 4: Age estimation in 6CH: Only the references of ages from 15 to 50 are shown. Comparisonresults are color-coded. Cyan, yellow, and magenta mean that the test subject is older than (),similar to (≈), and younger than (Y) a reference. The age is estimated correctly as 22.
Figure 5: Distributions of training images in the unsupervised algorithm (2CH).
Figure 6: MAEs of the proposed algorithm (1CH) and MV on FG-NET in terms of a test age.
Figure 7: Distributions of training images in the unsupervised algorithm (2CH) at κ = 20%, 30%,and 40%. From Figures 5 and 7, we see that stronger age-dependent tendencies are observed, as κgets smaller.
Figure 8: All reference images in the supervised 6CH. For some ages in certain chains, the balanced dataset includes less than 5 faces. In such cases, there are lessthan 5 references.
Figure 9: Age estimation results of the proposed algorithm (supervised 6CH). For each face, the es-timated label is provided together with the ground-truth in parentheses. In (a), the ages are estimatedcorrectly. In the last row, third column, the ethnic group is misclassified. This happens rarely. In(b), failure cases are provided. These are hard examples due to various challenging factors, such aslow quality photographs and occlusion by hairs, hats, hands, and stickers.
