Figure 1: The framework of ARML. For each task Ti , ARML first builds a prototype-based relationalstructure Ri by mapping the training samples Ditr into prototypes, with each prototype representsone class. Then, Ri interacts with the meta-knowledge graph G to acquire the most relevant historicalknowledge by information propagation. Finally, the task-specific modulation tailors the globallyshared initialization θ0 by aggregating of raw prototypes and enriched prototypes, which absorbsrelevant historical information from the meta-knowledge graph.
Figure 2: In the top figure, we show the interpretation of meta-knowledge graph. The left heatmapshows the similarity between prototypes (P0, P1) and meta-knowledge vertices (V0-V5). The rightpart show the meta-knowledge graph. In the bottom table, we show the overall performance (meansquare error with 95% confidence) of 10-shot 2D regression.
Figure 3: Interpretation of meta-knowledge graph on Art-Multi dataset. For each subdataset, werandomly select one task from them. In the left, we show the similarity heatmap between prototypes(P0-P5) and meta-knowledge vertices (V0-V7). In the right part, we show the meta-knowledge graph.
Figure 4: Effect of different filters.
Figure 5:	Interpretation of meta-knowledge graph on Plain-Multi dataset. For each subdataset, onetask is randomly selected from them. In the left figure, we show the similarity heatmap betweenprototypes (P1-P5) and meta-knowledge vertices (denoted as E1-E4), where deeper color meanshigher similarity. In the right part, we show the meta-knowledge graph, where a threshold is also setto filter low similarity links.
Figure 6:	Case study for learned structure of HSML. For each task, the top heatmap shows thesoft-assignment probability with each cluster and the top tree show the learned hierarchical structure.
Figure 7: Case study for learned structure of ARML. Both the learned graph and the similarityheatmap between prototypes and meta-knowledge vertices are illustrated.
Figure 8: Additional cases on 2D regression.
Figure 9: Additional cases of Art-Multi.
