Figure 1: Illustration of the models involved in AdVIL. From left to right: variational encoder Q(h|v),MRF P(v, h), variational decoder q(v, h) with a simple prior and q(v, h) with an expressive prior.
Figure 2: Curves of AdVIL on Digits. (a-c) compare the values of the variational approximations andthe corresponding ground truths. All bounds are rather tight after 5,000 iterations. (d) shows that theRBM loss (i.e., the loss of θ as in Eqn. (8)) tends to zero and the model converges gradually.
Figure 3: (a) Sensitivity analysis of K1 on the Digits dataset. (b-d) Learning curves of NVIL, AdVILand CD on the Mushrooms dataset. Compared to NVIL, AdVIL provides a tighter and lower varianceestimate of log Z and achieves better performance. Compared to PCD-1 and CD-10, AdVIL cantrack the log partition function and achieve comparable results though trained in a black-box manner.
Figure 4: Filters and samples of a GRBM learned by AdVIL on the Frey faces dataset. (a) presents thetraining data. (b) presents the first 40 filters of the GRBM. (c) and (d) show random samples from thevariational decoder and the GRBM, respectively. We present the mean of v for better visualization.
Figure 5: (a) shows that || Pv % δ(v, h) dE(X) ∣∣2 (in red) is less than ||dL∂⅛,φk) l∣2 (in blue) duringtraining. (b) shows that both the evidence lower bound (ELBO) -L1 (in red) and the log likelihood-L (in blue) converge gradually. The ELBO may be slightly over estimated because we approximatethe first term in Eqn. (7) by a Monte Carlo estimate.
Figure 7: AdVIL with two types of decoders. We set K1 = 5 in the NADE decoder and K1 = 100 inthe hierarchical decoder. The two models have a similar model capacity and training time.
Figure 6: (a-c) Samples from the RBM in different settings. (d-f) Samples from the decoder indifferent settings. We present the mean of v for better visualization in all settings.
Figure 8: DBM results of AdVIL and VCD on the Digits dataset. The curve of AdVIL is less stabledue to the presence of the minimax optimization problem but AdVIL achieves a better performance.
