Figure 1: Superior causality and predictive performance of the causal regularizer in our heart failurestudy. (a) Average causality score computed using ground truth causality labels. We compute thescore for top k codes reported by three algorithms. (b and c) The causal regularizer is more stable inpredictive performance measured by AUC and F1 metrics. See Section 3 for more details.
Figure 2: Some possible causal structures between two observed and one or more hidden variables.
Figure 3: Two use cases of the proposed causal regularizer: (a) In the proposed architecture, applyingthe causal regularizer allows identification of causal relationships in the non-linear settings, wherethe causality coefficient can change from subject to subject. (b) The causal regularizer allows usto explore the high-dimensional multi-variate combinations of the variables and identify plausiblehypotheses. Here, g generates the causal regularization coefficients for the hypotheses h. Theregularizer encourages the coordinates of h to be more causal.
Figure 4: Comparison of variable selection in logistic regression via the causal and L1 regularizerson two datsets and two accuracy measures. Note the stability of variable selection by the causalregularizer as the penalization coefficient varies.
Figure 5: (a) The predictive gain by the nonlinear causal model in Eq. (2) on the MIMIC III datset.
Figure 6: Histogram of maximum number of code occurrences.
Figure 7: Comparison of variable selection in logistic regression via the causal and L1 regularizerson two datsets and two accuracy measures. Note the stability of variable selection by the causalregularizer as the penalization coefficient varies.
Figure 8: The impact of λ on the top 50 selected variables, marked in the original plot in Figure 9 Asλ increases, there is a shift from left-up towards down-right corner and the trade-off shifts towardsselecting more causal codes despite possibly lower mutual information. In this figure a small noisehas been added to the points to visualize the overlapped points.
Figure 9: The scatter plot of causation score vs.
Figure 10: Distribution of the coefficients generated by the causality detector.
