Figure 1: a) Is an orthonormal basis in R2, u1 and u2 are linearly independent and span the space ofR2. A dot in this example represents a filter in a convolutional network with coefficients {v1, v2}.
Figure 2: An illustrative plot of multiple 3x3 spanning sets: a) Pixel-basis, b) Orthogonal Polyno-mial, c) Non-orthogonal Frame. Note the increased symmetries in b) and c).
Figure 3: The Dynamic Steerable Frame Network. The network transforms an input image to asteerable frame Φ (here an example with 3 frame functions) and estimates the local feature pose ateach location in this equivariant space with a small pose estimating network. Then it outputs a set ofpose coordinates τk, that are dependent on the group parametrization chosen. They are inserted intothe matrix of steering equations β(τ) and applied to the frame Φ, yielding the locally steered frame.
Figure 4: Results on the edge detection task. ToP is an illustration of a test image, bottom onesample from the actual infinite dataset, reported is root mean squared error. Autoencoder denotesa vanilla location invariant autoencoder. DFN denotes the plain Dynamic Filter Network, FrameDFN denotes a DFN whos input is a frame, DSFN denotes the Dynamic Steerable Frame Network.
Figure 5: Visualizations of the learned transformations by the Dynamic Steerable Frame Network(DSFN top) and the Spatial Transformer Network (STN bottom) on the hand-gesture recognitiondataset. The STN zooms and rotates the hands arbitrarily and apparently removes important infor-mation content thereby, leading to low classification accuracy. The DSFN acts locally and adaptivelyfilters the hands in multiple ways. Note that the DSFN did not learn fully rotation invariant filtersin all 4 cases, but in 3 cases produces different filter responses for different sides of the hand. How-ever, it does follow the contours of the hand and segments the borders from the background. Thisindicates that full rotation invariance is not suitable for this task. This would be hard to assess if onehad to choose the degree of invariance a priori, while the DSFN has the means to learn the necessaryamount of local invariance.
