Figure 1: Motivating toy example. From left to right: the first digit shows what the model is condi-tioned upon, the second digit shows the frame we would like to predict at the next time step, the thirddigit shows the blurry prediction if we were to minimize MSE in pixel space, the last digit showsthe prediction when minimizing MSE in the space of transformations. While the two models mayhave the same MSE in pixel space, the transformation-based model generates much sharper outputs.
Figure 2: Outline of the transformation-based model. The model is a CNN that takes as input asequence of consecutive affine transforms between pairs of adjacent video frames. It predicts theaffine transform between the last input frame and the next one in the sequence. We compute affinetransforms (6 parameters per patch) for overlapping patches of size 8 × 8 in each video frame.
Figure 3: Outline of the system predicting 4 frames ahead in time. Only affine transforms A1, A2and A3 are provided, and the model predicts A4, A5 , A6 and A7, which are used to reconstructthe next 4 frames. Since affine parameters are continuous values and the whole chain of CNNs isdifferentiable, the whole unrolled system can be trained by back-propagation of the error. Note thatCNNs all share the same parametersLet x and y have size Dr × Dc . Let image x be decomposed into a set of overlapping patches, eachcontaining pixels from patches of size dr × dc with dr ≤ Dr and dc ≤ Dc. These patches are laid outon a regular grid with stride sr and sc pixels over rows and columns, respectively. Therefore, everypixel participates in dr dc overlapping patches, not taking into account for the sake of simplicityborder effects and non-integer divisions. We denote the whole set of overlapping patches by {Xk},where index k runs over the whole set of patches. Similarly and using the same coordinate system,we denote by {Yk} the set of overlapping patches ofy.
Figure 4: Predictions of 4 sequences from the moving MNIST dataset. The top row of each pairshows the ground truth frames; the first four frames are used as input to the model. The bottom rowshows the predictions of the model.
Figure 5: Example of predictions produced by different models. Each row shows an example.
