Figure 1: Model illustration. (a) User-item interaction events data. Each edge stands for a tupleand contains the information of user, item, interaction time, and interaction feature. (b) The latentfeature of the user and item are updated at each event time, by a nonlinear activation function σ(∙)and contain four terms: self evolution, co-evolution, context (interaction feature), and self drift.
Figure 2: Intensity computation. (a) Each arrow means the flow of feature embedding ComPUta-tion, e.g., Jacob interacts with basketball at 10:15am. Then the embeddings are updated: his featureat 10:15 am is influenced by his feature and the basketball feature at 9:45am (arrow 1 and 2); thebasketball’s feature is influenced by Jacob’s feature and its feature (arrow 3 and 4). (b) The eventsdependency for two users and two forums (items). It shows how event at one dimension influenceother dimensions. Each orange arrow represents the dependency within each dimension, and theblack arrow denotes the cross-dimension dependency, e.g., Sophie interacts with volleyball at 2:30pm,and this event changes the volleyball embedding, thus will affect Jacob,s visit at 3:30pm.
Figure 3: Survival probability computation. (a) A user or item’s feature embedding is piecewiseconstant and will change only after an interaction event happens. Only one dimension of the featureembedding is shown. (b) Survival probability for a user-item pair (u, i). The integral RT λu,i(τ∣τ0)dτis decomposed into 4 inter-event intervals separated by {t0, ∙ ∙ ∙ ,t3}, with close form on each interval.
Figure 4: Prediction results on three real world datasets.
Figure 5: Visualization of the sparsity property in each dataset. The first row shows the distributionof number of events per user. The second row shows the user-item interaction graph. It is generatedas follows. For each dataset, we randomly pick 10 users with 100 history events each user and collectall items they have interacted with. The interaction graph itself is a bipartite graph, and we put userson left side, and items on the right side.
Figure 6: Comparison of performance with different amount of history.
