Figure 1: Graphical models for the Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder (GMVAE) showingthe generative model (left) and the variational family (right).
Figure 2: Visualisation of the synthetic dataset: (a) Data is distributed with 5 modes on the 2dimensional data space. (b) GMVAE learns the density model that can model data using a mixtureof non-Gaussian distributions in the data space. (c) GMM cannot represent the data as well becauseof the restrictive Gaussian assumption. (d) GMVAE, however, suffers from over-regularisation andcan result in poor minima when looking at the latent space. (e) Using the modification to the ELBO(Kingma et al., 2016) allows the clusters to spread out. (f) As the model converges the z-prior termis activated and regularises the clusters in the final stage by merging excessive clusters.
Figure 3: Plot of z-prior term: (a) Without information constraint, GMVAE suffers from over-regularisation as it converges to a poor optimum that merges all clusters together to avoid the KLcost. (b) Before reaching the threshold value (dotted line), the gradient from the z-prior term canbe turned off to avoid the clusters from being pulled together (see text for details). By the timethe threshold value is reached, the clusters are sufficiently separated. At this point the activatedgradient from the z-prior term only merges very overlapping clusters together. Even after activatingits gradient the value of the z-prior continues to decrease as it is over-powered by other terms thatlead to meaningful clusters and better optimum.
Figure 4: Clustering Accuracy with different numbers of clusters (K) and Monte Carlo samples(M): After only few epochs, the GMVAE converges to a solution. Increasing the number of clustersimproves the quality of the solution considerably.
Figure 5: Generated MNIST samples: (a) Each row contains 10 randomly generated samplesfrom different Gaussian components of the Gaussian mixture. The GMVAE learns a meaningfulgenerative model where the discrete latent variables z correspond directly to the digit values in anunsupervised manner. (b) Samples generated by traversing around w space, each position of wcorrespond to a specific style of the digit.
Figure 6: Generated SVHN samples: Each row corresponds to 10 samples generated randomlyfrom different Gaussian components. GMVAE groups together images that are visually similar.
