Figure 1: Comparison of our work to previous work. In both works, the sender sends an imagebelonging to one class and the receiver receives an image belonging to a different class, “smile” or“no smile”. In our work, we design an attack on the latent encoding, in previous work (Kos et al.,2017), they perform an attack on the input image.
Figure 2: Notation and Models: E, D and C are the encoder, decoder and classifier networks.
Figure 3: The dataset. Snippet of (test)images with two labels - smiling and non-smiling.
Figure 4: Under L2 regularization Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in an Independent attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 5: Under L1 regularization. Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in a Poison+Class attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 6: Under L1 regularization. Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in an Independent attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 7: Under L2 regularization. Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in a poisoning attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 8: Under L1 regularization. Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in an poisoning attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 9: Under L2 regularization. Random examples of decoded latents with and without additiveperturbation in an poisoning+Class attack. Smile (a) and (d), no smile (b) and (c).
Figure 10: Visualization of the values of each element in the learned ∆z in an additive perturbationattack. The x-axis corresponds to units in ∆z and the y-axis to the values that each unit takes. Thisfigure demonstrates the effect of L1 and L2 regularization on the sparsity of the ∆z learned.
Figure 11: Difference image between decoded encodings (reconstructions) and decoded tampered-encodings for additive perturbation attacks. Here we show only results in the direction of +∆z .
