Figure 1: Randomly sampled poses of a single 3D-printed turtle adversarially perturbed to classifyas a rifle at every viewpoint by an ImageNet classifier. An unperturbed model is classified correctlyas a turtle 100% of the time. See https://youtu.be/YXy6oX1iNoA for a video where everyframe is fed through the classifier: the turtle is consistently classified as a rifle.
Figure 2:	A 2D adversarial example, showing classifier confidence in true and adversarial classesfor original and corresponding adversarial image over randomly sampled poses.
Figure 3:	A 3D adversarial example, showing classifier confidence in true and adversarial classesfor original and corresponding adversarial object over randomly sampled poses.
Figure 4: A sample of photos of unperturbed 3D prints. The unperturbed 3D-printed objects areconsistently classified as the true class.
Figure 5: Random sample of photographs of the two 3D-printed adversarial objects. The 3D-printed adversarial objects are strongly adversarial over a wide distribution of viewpoints.
Figure 6: Three pictures of the same adversarial turtle (all classified as “rifle”), demonstrating theneed for a wide distribution, and the efficacy of EOT in finding examples robust across wide distri-butions of physical-world effects like lighting.
Figure 7: A side-by-side comparison of a 3D-printed model (left) along with a printout of the cor-responding texture, printed on a standard laser color printer (center) and the original digital texture(right), showing significant error in color accuracy in printing.
Figure 8:	A random sample of 2D adversarial examples.
Figure 9:	A random sample of 2D adversarial examples.
Figure 10: A random sample of 3D adversarial examples.
Figure 11: A random sample of 3D adversarial examples.
Figure 12: A random sample of 3D adversarial examples.
Figure 13: A histogram of adversariality (percent of 100 samples classified as the adversarial class)across the 200 3D adversarial examples.
Figure 14: All 100 photographs of our physical-world 3D adversarial turtle.
Figure 15: All 100 photographs of our physical-world 3D adversarial baseball.
