Figure 1: We propose a method to estimate uncertainty in any network using batch normalization(MCBN). Here, we show results on a toy dataset from networks with three hidden layers (30 unitsper layer). The solid line is the predictive mean of 500 stochastic forward passes. The outer areadepicts the model’s uncertainty as the 95% CI of the predictive distribution for each x value (innershaded area is 50% CI). On the right, we show a similar plot using dropout to estimate uncertainty(MCDO)(Gal & Ghahramani, 2015). The bottom row depicts a minimally useful baseline - thesame networks but with a constant uncertainty (CUBN, CUDO).
Figure 2: Errors in predictions (gray dots) sorted by estimated uncertainty on select datasets. Theshaded areas show MCBN’s (blue) and MCDO’s (red) model uncertainty (light area 95% CI, darkarea 50% CI). Gray dots show absolute prediction errors on the test set, and the gray line depicts arunning mean of the errors. The dashed line indicates the optimized constant uncertainty. A corre-lation between estimated uncertainty (shaded area) and mean error (gray) indicates the uncertaintyestimates are meaningful for estimating errors. See Appendix for complete results.
Figure 3: Results applying MCBN to Bayesian SegNet (Kendall et al., 2015). In the upper left, ascene from the CamVid driving scenes dataset. In the upper right, the Bayesian estimated segmen-tation. In the lower left, estimated uncertainty using MCBN for the car class. In the lower right, theestimated uncertainty of MCBN for all 11 classes.
Figure 4: Batch statistics used to train the network are normal. A one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnovtest checks that μB and σB Come from a standard normal distribution. More examples are availablein Appendix 6.7.
Figure 5: Errors in predictions (gray dots) sorted by estimated uncertainty on select datasets. Theshaded areas show MCBN’s (blue) and MCDO’s (red) model uncertainty (light area 95% CL darkarea 50% CI). Gray dots show absolute prediction errors on the test set, and the gray line depicts arunning mean of the errors. The dashed line indicates the optimized constant uncertainty. A corre-lation between estimated uncertainty (shaded area) and mean error (gray) indicates the uncertaintyestimates are meaningful for estimating errors.
Figure 6: Errors in predictions (gray dots) sorted by estimated uncertainty on select datasets. Theshaded areas show MCBN’s (blue) and MCDO’s (red) model uncertainty (light area 95% CL darkarea 50% CI). Gray dots show absolute prediction errors on the test set, and the gray line depicts arunning mean of the errors. The dashed line indicates the optimized constant uncertainty. A corre-lation between estimated uncertainty (shaded area) and mean error (gray) indicates the uncertaintyestimates are meaningful for estimating errors.
Figure 7: The distribution of means of mini-batches during training of one of our datasets. The dis-tribution closely follows our analytically approximated Gaussian distribution. The data is collectedfor one unit of each layer and is provided for different epochs and for different batch sizes.
Figure 8: The distribution of standard deviation of mini-batches during training of one of ourdatasets. The distribution closely follows our analytically approximated Gaussian distribution. Thedata is collected for one unit of each layer and is provided for different epochs and for differentbatch sizes.
