Figure 1: CARA3C network - Confidence-based weight vector calculation for state s1.
Figure 2: Training curves for raw scores obtained by CARA3C and LRA3C.
Figure 3: Percentage improvement achieved by CARA3C and LRA3C over A3C.
Figure 4: Difference in weights given by CARA3C and LRA3C to each of the n-step returns (wheren ≤ 20) during an episode.
Figure 5: Relation between the confidence assigned to a state and the percent change in their valueestimate. Percentage change in value estimates were obtained by calculating the value estimate of astate just before and after a batch gradient update step.
Figure 6: Evolution of confidence over an episode along with game frames for certain states withhigh confidence values.
Figure 7: Comparison of value function estimates of CARA3C, LRA3C and A3C.
Figure 8: Training curves for CARA3C and LRA3C15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018Appendix D:	Difference in Weights Assigned by CARA3C and LRA3CThis appendix presents the expanded version of the results shown in Section 4.2. These plots showthe vast differences in weights assigned by CARA3C and LRA3C to various n-step returns over theduration of a single episode.
Figure 9: Difference in weights given by CARA3C and LRA3C to each of the n-step returns (wheren ≤ 20) during an episode.
Figure 10: Evolution of confidence values over an episode.
Figure 11: Tuning the important hyper-parameters for our methodsPerhaps the most important hyper-parameter in CARA3C is the network which calculates theconfidence values. Since gradients do not flow back from confidence computation to the LSTMcontroller, this becomes an important design choice. We experimented extensively with differenttypes of confidence computation networks including shallow ones, deep ones, wide ones and narrowones. We found a "zero hidden layer" network on top of the LSTM controller (much like onewhich computes the value function) works the best (Figure 11a). Similarly, the most importanthyper-parameter in λ-returns is the λ from eq. (3). While we experimented with a large number andrange of values for λ the best performing ones have been reported in Figure 11b.
