Figure 1: Observation of learning identity mapping in an LSTM model trained on the adding prob-lem task (see Section 3.1). The average estimation error is computed over a batch of 128 samples ofthe test set. (a) and (b) show the evaluation of Eq. 1 and Eq. 3 respectively. The x-axis indicates theindex of the step that compares with the final output hT or its previous step ht-1.
Figure 2: Mean Squared Error (MSE) plots during the testing phase of the adding problem task fordifferent sequence lengths. The errors are presented in log scale. LSTM performs the worst in allthree tasks. RIN and IRNN models are comparable in (a) and (b), and (c).
Figure 3: Results for network type 1-200. (a) and (b) show the loss and accuracy curves on Se-quential MNIST; (c) and (d) present the loss and accuracy curves on Permuted MNIST. RINs andRIN-DTs converge much faster than IRNNs and LSTMs in the early stage of training (first 100epochs) and achieve a better final accuracy.
Figure 4: Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 1-200over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3. The x-axis indicatesthe index of the step that compares with the final output hT or its previous step ht-1, and y-axisrepresents the average estimation error (AEE).
Figure 5:	Mean Squared Error (MSE) plots for the adding problem with different sequence lengthsat training phase. The figures are presented in log scale. All models are trained up to 300 epochs.
Figure 6:	(a) and (b) show the training loss and accuracy plots for Sequential MNIST; (c) and(d) present training loss and accuracy plots for Permuted MNIST. We use blue color palette torepresent RIN experiments, orange color palette to represent IRNN experiments, purple color paletteto represent LSTM experiments and green color palette to represent RIN-DT experiments. RINs andRIN-DTs are much better than IRNNs and LSTMs in the early stage of training (first 200 epochs).
Figure 7: (a) and (b) show the test loss and accuracy plots for Sequential MNIST; (c) and (d) presenttest loss and accuracy plots for Permuted MNIST.
Figure 8: Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 1-100over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3.
Figure 9: Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 2-100over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3.
Figure 10: Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 2-200over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3.
Figure 11:	Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 3-100over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3.
Figure 12:	Evidence of learning identity mapping in RIN, IRNN and LSTM for network type 3-200over a batch of 128 samples. (a) evaluates Eq. 1 and (b) evaluates Eq. 3.
