Figure 1: The structure of the reconstruction neural network. x0 was reconstructed from the projec-tion data by FBP. The convolutional layers used symmetric padding on the image boundary.
Figure 2: Geometry of the CT imaging system: (a) the helical scanning geometry in most clinicalCT systems; (b) the multi-slice fan-beam geometry after projection data rebinning (resampling).
Figure 3: The structure of the detection neural network. The modules in dashed boxes did not usepadding, whereas the rest used zero padding if applicable.
Figure 4: The schematics for joined training of the reconstruction and detection neural networks.
Figure 5: The patch-wise cross-entropy losses of validating CT images: (a) the cross-entropy lossof each individual image; (b) the box-and-whisker plot of the individual losses.
Figure 6: ROC curve of the lung nodule detection: (a) the entire ROC curve; (b) the ROC curve inthe range that false positive rate is smaller than 0.1.
Figure 7: Cross entropy losses of different types of sample. The error bar is the standard deviationof the losses, which was truncated to zeros at the lower bounds.
Figure 8: The reconstructed CT images for one of the validating images. From top to bottom areaxial, coronal and sagittal views respectively. The FBP images were reconstructed with Hann filter,which was designed for noise suppresion. The lung nodule was annnotated with white dashed boxesand zoomed in at the lower right in each view. The display window was [-1000HU, 500HU] for allthe images.
Figure 9: Example nodules: the predictions and labels of (a) - (d) are shown in table 3. For eachsub-figure, from left to right were the axial, coronal and sagittal views of the suspicious lesion. Thedisplay window was [-1000HU, 500HU].
Figure 10: The recosntructed images at different iterations in the reconstruction network. From theleft to right columns, the images are initial FBP, results after 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 iterations. The displaywindow is [-1000HU, 500HU].
Figure 11: Feature maps from intermediate convoltuional layers of the reconstruction neural network(after applying pReLU): (a) the feature maps with the highest correlation from the same channel intwo-step and end-to-end networks. (b) the feature maps with the lowest correlation from the samechannel in the two networks. The feature maps were from first PReLU of iteration 1, first PReLUof iteration 5, and second PReLU of iteration 10, respectively from the left to right columns. All thefeature maps were normalized to [0,1] independently.
