Figure 1: Description of the BASELINE approach for WSI classification via aggregation of tile-levelfeatures into global slide descriptors.
Figure 2: Description of the CHOWDER architecture (for R = 2) for WSI classification via MLPon operating on top positive and negative instances shown for a single sample mini-batch sample.
Figure 3: Performance curves for Camelyon-16 dataset for both classification and segmentationtasks for the different tested approaches. Left: ROC curves for the classification task. Right: FROCcurves for lesion detection task.
Figure 4: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 27 of the Camelyon-16 datasetusing our proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation ofmetastases shown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from whiteto red according to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail ofmetastases at zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, theoutput of all tested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red,with blue representing the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color werenot included when randomly selecting tiles for inference.
Figure 5: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 2 of the Camelyon-16 dataset usingour proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation of metastasesshown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from white to red ac-cording to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail of metastasesat zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, the output of alltested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red, with blue rep-resenting the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color were not includedwhen randomly selecting tiles for inference.
Figure 6: Visualization of metastasis detection on test image 92 of the Camelyon-16 datasetusing our proposed approach. Left: Full WSI at zoom level 6 with ground truth annotation ofmetastases shown via black border. Tiles with positive feature embeddings are colored from whiteto red according to their magnitude, with red representing the largest magnitude. Right: Detail ofmetastases at zoom level 2 overlaid with classification output of our proposed approach. Here, theoutput of all tested tiles are shown and colored according to their value, from blue to white to red,with blue representing the most negative values, and red the most positive. Tiles without color werenot included when randomly selecting tiles for inference.
