Figure 1: Visualizations of mode collapse in the synthetic, GAN-generated data produced after train-ing on our chosen subsets of CelebA and LSUN datasets. Left panel shows the relative distributionof classes in samples drawn from synthetic datasets extracted at the end of the training process, andcompares is to the true data distribution (leftmost plots). On the right, shown is the evolution of anal-ogous class distribution for different GANs over the course of training. BEGAN did not convergeon the LSUN tasks and hence is excluded from the corresponding analysis.
Figure 2: Illustration of datasets from CelebA used in proposed classification-based benchmarks toevaluate GANs. Shown alongside are images sampled from various unconditional GANs trained onthis dataset. Labels for the GAN samples are obtained using a pre-trained classifier as an annotator.
Figure 3: Illustration of datasets from LSUN used in proposed classification-based benchmarks toevaluate GANs. Shown alongside are images sampled from various unconditional GANs trained onthis dataset. Labels for the GAN samples are obtained using a pre-trained classifier as an annotator.
Figure 4: Histograms of annotator confidence (softmax probability) during label prediction on truedata (test set) and synthetic data for tasks on the CelebA and LSUN datasets (see Section 3.4).
Figure 5: Illustration of the classification performance of true data compared with GAN-generatedsynthetic datasets based on experiments described in Section 3.4. Classification is performed usinga basic linear model, described in Section 3.2, and performance is reported in terms of accuracy ona hold-out set of true data. In the plots, the bold curve captures the classification performance ofmodels trained on true data vs the size of the true dataset (maximum size is N). Dashed lines rep-resent performance of classifiers trained on various GAN-generated datasets of size N . These plotsindicate that GAN samples have ”diversity” comparable to a small subset (few hundred samples) oftrue data. Here the notion of diversity is one that is relevant for classification tasks.
