Figure 1: Components of the genetic algorithm.
Figure 2: A small Noisy-ORmodel. Each observable ydis conditionally dependenton all sh . The generativeprocess first samples eachsh from a Bernoulli distribu-tion; then each yd is sampledfrom a Bernoulli distributionof parameter Nd(~s), gener-ating a data-point.
Figure 3: Reliability for thelisted EAs over 10 runs ofEEM for noisy-OR on 8x8bars images. In this figure,black bars indicate both pri-ors and bars were recoveredcorrectly, grey bars indicatebars were recovered but notpriors. For all runs H = 16,N = 104, Ng = 2, Np = 8,Nc = 7, S = 120. Each runperformed 100 iterations.
Figure 4: Sample input (left) and learned generative fields (right) for a run on overlapping bars.
Figure 5: Reliability for thelisted EAs over 20 runs ofEEM for BSC on 10x10 barsimages.
Figure 6: 50 generative fields learned by applying EEM ("fitparents-sparseflips")for noisy-OR tonatural image patches. See Appendix F for a run at H = 200.
Figure 7: Results on training the BSC model on natural images using the “fitparents-cross-sparseflips” EA. A 60 of the 300 generative fields obtained through training (see Appendix for allfields). B Evolution of the free energy per data point over iterations. C Evolution of the expectednumber of active hidden units per data point over iterations. D Evolution of the standard deviationover iterations.
Figure 8: Results of the experiment with artificial data (10x10 bars) for the BSC model. Depictedis the evolution of the free energy for different EAs averaged over 20 independent runs. Dots andvertical errorbars show the mean and the standard deviation, respectively.
Figure 9: Full dictionary learned from natural images by the BSC model trained with the “fitparents-cross-sparseflips” EA. Depicted is the dictionary at iteration 4,000. The generative fields are orderedaccording to their activation, starting with most active fields.
Figure 10: Generative fields learned running EEM for noisy-OR (“fitparents-sparseflips”) for 175iterations with H = 200 latent variables. Learned crowdedness πH was 1.6.
