Figure 1: Stimulus representation in working memory. (A) When presented with an external stim-ulus, S, neural activity patterns initially encode an internal representation of that stimulus, S(t=0).
Figure 2: Stimulus retention in self-organizing memory networks. (A) Neural dynamics of the first50 ms of a simulation of two different networks with the same random initial conditions. Onenetwork had constant random synapses (bottom panel), while the other one had plastic synapses thatwere updated via Eq. 3 (top panel). Red dashed lines show the firing rates of 10 of the neurons.
Figure 3: Network robustness to noise. (A) The fraction of stimulus retained for 100 random initial-izations for a FEVER network (black) and plastic random network (blue) with Gaussian noise mean0 and standard deviation .00001. (B) The fraction of stimulus retained for 100 random initializationsof networks with differing levels of synaptic update noise (α). Shaded areas in A and B represent ±standard error of the mean.
Figure 4: Network robustness to partial plasticity and partial connectivity. (A) The fraction ofstimulus retained for 100 random initializations. Different lines are for different fractions of plasticsynapses. (B) The fraction of stimulus retained over 100 random initializations. Different lines arefor different connection probabilities. Shaded areas represent ± standard error of the mean.
Figure 5: Training improves performance. (A) The fraction of stimulus retained over 100 randominitializations for a plastic random synapse network that has seen 0 previous stimuli (orange), 1 pre-vious stimulus (blue), 5 previous stimuli (green) or 10 previous stimuli (purple). (B) The fraction ofstimulus retained over 100 random initializations for a constant synapse network that has previouslybeen trained on 0, 1, 5, or 10 previous stimuli, but with no training during the simulation periodshown. Color coding as in panel A. Shaded areas in A and B represent ± standard error of the mean.
Figure 6: Remembering four things. (A) The average fraction of four stimuli retained for 100randomly initialized networks with constant random synapses (dashed lines) and plastic randomsynapses (solid lines). Different colors are for different stimulus values. Shaded areas represent ±standard error of the mean. (B). A zoomed in look at the average fraction of four stimuli retained inthe plastic model in panel A. Shading omitted from lines in panel B for clarity.
Figure 7: Potential biological implementations. (A) Cartoon depicting error signals being calculatedlocally by the neurons, apical dendrites (Guergiuev et al., 2016). The read-out neuron calculates theremembered stimulus value via Eq. 5, where qi is the weight of the synapses from cell i in thememory circuit to the read-out neuron. The apical dendrite calculates the error signal, weighted bydi, by subtracting feedback values at adjacent time points. The basal dendrite receives inputs fromneurons in the working memory circuit. The soma transmits the error signal to the basal dendrites,where the synaptic updates, Lij are calculated by correlating the pre- and post-synaptic activitieswith the error signal. (B) Cartoon depicting error signals being communicated by neuromodulators.
