Figure 1: Classification accuracy of different schemes in predicting the sum of a (left) N=3 and (right) N=6MNIST digits without access to individual image labels. The training set was fixed to 10,000 sets.
Figure 2: Examples for 8 out of 40 object classes (column) in the ModelNet40. Each point-cloud is producesby sampling 1000 particles from the mesh representation of the original MeodelNet40 instances. Two point-clouds in the same column are from the same class. The projection of particles into xy, zy and xz planes areadded for better visualization.
Figure 3: Each box is the particle-cloud maximizing the activation of a unit at the firs (top) and second(bottom) permutation-equivariant layers of our model. Two images of the same column are two different viewsof the same point-cloud.
Figure 4: Each row shows a set, constructed from CelebA dataset, such that all set members except for anoutlier, share at least two attributes (on the right). The outlier is identified with a red frame. The modelis trained by observing examples of sets and their anomalous members, without access to the attributes. Theprobability assigned to each member by the outlier detection network is visualized using a red bar at the bottomof each image. The probabilities in each row sum to one. See Appendix B.2 for more examples.
Figure 5: application of permutation-equivariant layer to semi-supervised red-shift prediction using clusteringinformation: a) distribution of cluster (set) size; b) distribution of reliable red-shift estimates per cluster; c)prediction of red-shift on test-set (versus ground-truth) using clustering information as well as RedMaPPerphotometric estimates (also using clustering information).
Figure 6: Each row of the images shows a set, constructed from CelebA dataset images, such that all set mem-bers except for an outlier, share at least two attributes. The outlier is identified with a red frame. The modelis trained by observing examples of sets and their anomalous members and without access to the attributes.
