Figure 1: Illustration of (a) Alice's effective system for public use, and (b) Alice's idealistic systemnot for public use. In the figure, K denotes the already-learned model/APL Ki denotes the kernelthat perturbs the input data query by potential adversaries, and K denotes the kernel that perturbsthe output response from K to publish the final response Y.
Figure 2: Illustration of Alice's information-laundered system for public use, by (a) alternating inputonly, and (b) alternating output only. The notations are similar to those in Figure 1.
Figure 3: Visualization of Algorithm 2 in terms of the convergence (row 1) and the final transitionprobabilities (row 2), for β = 100, 10, 1 (corresponding to three columns).
Figure 4: Visualization of (a) Alice's out-sample performance against the tradeoff parameter β2in Information Laundering, and (b) Alice’s model utility-privacy tradeoffs under the informationlaundering technique and the random benchmark using Dirichlet-generated transition laws. Detailedparameters are summarized in Table 1.
Figure 5: HeatmaP showing the transition law pK2 (y | y) for information laundering, under (a) 20%of class-0 labels, and (b) 1% of class-0 labels. In contrast with the case (a), the class-0 is negligiblein (b) and thus the transition probabilities pK2 (0 | y) for each y becomes smaller (as indicated bydarker colors).
Figure 6: Visualization of (a) Alice's out-sample performance against the tradeoff parameter β2in Information Laundering, and (b) Alice’s model utility-privacy tradeoffs under the informationlaundering technique and the random benchmark using Dirichlet-generated transition laws. Detailedparameters are summarized in Table 2.
Figure 7: HeatmaP (row 1) showing the transition laws optimized from information laundering,under (a) β2 = 1, and (b) β2 = 20. The snapshots of probability mass functions of Y conditionalon Y = 69 are also visualized (row 2).
Figure 8: An adversary's utility against the laundering parameter β2 in the contexts of (a) Retrainingattack with random queries, and (b) Equation-Solving attack. In each plot, the three curves representquery sizes n = 100, 300, 1000, respectively.
Figure 9: An adversary,s utility against the laundering parameter β2 in the contexts of Retrainingattacks, where (a) both the adversary and the target use the Random Forest model, and (b) theadversary uses the Logistic model while the target uses the Random Forest. In each plot, the threecurves represent query sizes n = 100, 300, 1000, respectively.
