Figure 1: PermaKey consists of three modules (encapsulated by the dotted lines): learning a suitablespatial feature embedding (1), solving a local spatial prediction task (2), and converting error maps tokeypoints (3). Objective functions used to learn each of the 3 modules shown within dotted blocks.
Figure 2:	Image (row 1), Transporter keypoints overlaid on image (row 2), PermaKey (ours) keypointsoverlaid on image (row 3), predictability maps from feature layers 0 and 1 (rows 4 & 5 respectively).
Figure 3:	Two different prediction sce-narios encountered when attempting tosolve the LSP task. In the first case,too little context information is availableto predict the center patch from its sur-roundings, likely yielding a predictionerror (assuming the character is not al-ways present). Alternatively, when suffi-cient context is available as in the secondcase, prediction becomes easy.
Figure 4: Keypointregions highlighted.
Figure 5: Observed Enduro frames (odd columns) and with overlaid keypoints from 5 random seedshaving a unique color (even columns). The inferred keypoints are stable across different runs andconsistently focus on salient object parts. Additional frames can be seen in Figure 8 in Appendix B.
Figure 6: Image (row 1), keypoints (15, 20 and 25) overlaid on image (rows 2, 3 and 4). With 15keypoints (row 2) we can see that our model prioritizes the keypoints to capture only the most salientobject parts in the scene i.e. ice floats, player, scoreboard etc. As we increase the number of keypointsavailable it places the excess keypoints on the right border, after having captured all the highly salientobject parts i.e. ice floats, player, birds etc.
Figure 7: Image (row 1), keypoints using feature layer(s) = {(0), (0, 1), (2, 3), (0, 1, 2, 3)} (rows 2,3, 4 and 5 respectively) for local spatial predictability task. We can see that using feature layers 0 and1 achieves the best keypoint quality. Including higher feature layers (rows 4 and 5) results in moreuneven grouping of rows of enemy aliens to keypoints (columns 1, 2 and 6 row 5) and failure to trackorange shields (rows 4 and 5).
Figure 8: image (row 1), keypoints colour coded from 5 random seeds overlaid simultaneously onimage (row 2). As we can see the learned keypoints remain stable across different runs and capturethe salient object parts i.e. player, edges of the road, oncoming traffic, scoreboard etc. each time.
Figure 9: image (row 1), keypoints colour coded from 5 random seeds overlaid simultaneously onimage (row 2). As we can see the learned keypoints remain stable across different runs and capturethe salient object parts i.e. player tank parts, enemy tank, orientation dial at the top etc. each time.
