Figure 1: Illustration of the importance of topological correctness in a neuron image segmentationtask and the effectiveness of the proposed DMT-loss. The goal of this task is to segment membraneswhich partition the image into regions corresponding to neurons. (a) an input neuron image withchallenging locations (blur regions) highlighted. (b) ground truth segmentation of the membranes(dark blue) and the result neuron regions. (c) likelihood map of a baseline method without topologicalguarantee (Ronneberger et al., 2015). (d) segmentation results of the baseline method. Small pixel-wise errors lead to broken membranes, resulting in the merging of many neurons into one. (e) Thetopologically critical structure captured by the proposed DMT-loss (based on the likelihood in (c)).
Figure 2: Overview of our method. Topologically critical and error-prune structures are highlighted.
Figure 3: From left to right: (a) Likelihood map. (b) Density map: the z-axis value is the probabilityof the likelihood map in the left figure. (c) Density map for the highlighted region in the middlefigure. M1 and M2 are maxima (red dots), V is a minimum (yellow), S is a saddle (green) with itsstable manifolds flowing to it from M1 and M2 .
Figure 4: From left to right: (a) Sample likelihood map, (b) Ground truth, (c) improperly prunedstructures and (d) properly pruned structures.
Figure 5: Spanningtree illustration.
Figure 6: Qualitative results of the proposed method compared to other models. From left to right:sample images, ground truth, results for DIVE, U-Net, Mosin., TopoLoss and our proposed DMT.
Figure 7: Illustration of comparison between the proposed DMT-loss and a simple reweighted crossentropy loss. Please refer to Fig. 10(b) for the likelihood map of a baseline method without topologicalguarantee. (a) an input neuron image. (b) The topologically critical structures from the likelihood,captured by the proposed discrete Morse algorithm. These structures will be used in the DMT-Loss.
Figure 8: Illustration of an index-1 topological error (3D hole in the middle) for a 3D syntheticdata. The ground truth is a complete sheet without the hole. We intentionally weaken the likelihoodfunction in the middle. So the segmentation has a hole in the middle. Left: 3D segmentation result.
Figure 9: Illustration of an index-2 topological error from a 3D vessel image. The vessel segmentationhas a broken connection near bottom-left of the Left image. Left: part of the 3D segmentation result.
Figure 10: Illustration of two different types of topological errors captured by DMT-loss. (a) aninput neuron image with challenging locations highlighted. (b) likelihood map of a baseline methodwithout topological guarantee (Ronneberger et al., 2015). (c) ground truth. (d) The topologicallycritical structure from the likelihood, captured by the proposed discrete Morse algorithm. Thesestructures will be used in the DMT-Loss.
Figure 11: Segmentation results for ISBI13 dataset and 3 randomly selected neurons.
