Figure 1:	An overview of the MARL framework. Our work replaces the widely used GRU/LSTM-based individual value function with a transformer-based function. Actions are separated into actiongroups according to observations.
Figure 2:	Three variants on different policy decoupling method types (upper part) and two variantson different temporal unit types (bottom). ‘AR’ , ‘MA’ and ‘EXP’ represent Action Restriction,Multi-task at A time and EXPlainable, respectively. o, e, q and h represents for observation, embed-ding, q-value and hidden states with n observation entities and m available actions. G represents forthe global hidden state and t is the current time step. A black circle indicates that the variant pos-sesses this attribute; moreover, variant (d) is our proposed UPDeT with best performance. Furtherdetails on all five variants can be found in Section 3.
Figure 3: The main pipeline of our proposed UPDeT, where o, e, q represent observation entity,feature embedding and Q-value of each action respectively. Three operations are adopted to avoidintroducing new parameters when forming the policy distribution, namely ‘preserve’, ‘aggregation’and ‘abandon’. Details can be found in Section 3.3 and a real case can be found in Fig. 7.
Figure 4: Experimental results with different task settings. Details can be found in Section 4.1.2.
Figure 5: Experimental results on transfer learning with UPDeT (Uni-Transfer) and GRU unit(GRU-Transfer), along with UPDeT training from scratch (Uni-Scratch). At time step 0 and 500k,we load the model from the source scenario and finetune on the target scenarios. The circular pointsindicate the model performance on new scenarios without finetuning.
Figure 6: An analysis of the attention based strategy of UPDeT. Part (a) visualizes a typical attentionmatrix. Part (b) utilizes the simplified attention matrix to describe the relationship betWeen attentionand final strategy. Further discussion can be found in Section 4.4.
Figure 7: Real case on 3 Marines vs 3 Marines Challenge from SMAC.
Figure 8: Experimental results on the large-scale MAS, including SMAC and MAgent.
