Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Towards the Latent Transcriptome
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
In this work we propose a method to compute continuous embeddings for kmers
from raw RNA-seq data, in a reference-free fashion. We report that our model
captures information of both DNA sequence similarity as well as DNA sequence
abundance in the embedding latent space. We confirm the quality of these vectors
by comparing them to known gene sub-structures and report that the latent space
recovers exon information from raw RNA-Seq data from acute myeloid leukemia
patients. Furthermore we show that this latent space allows the detection of ge-
nomic abnormalities such as translocations as well as patient-specific mutations,
making this representation space both useful for visualization as well as analysis.
1 Introduction
The fundamental issue we would like to address in this paper is the need for a flexible representa-
tion of RNA-Seq experimental data. Standard RNA-Seq analysis pipelines discard rich information
for a more canonical result (Valbuena et al., 1978; Zielezinski et al., 2017). This information may
be crucial, since diseases such as cancer are known for their high mutational burden, multiple rear-
rangements and unconventional genomes, which do not fit the assumptions of the standard RNA-Seq
pipeline, that uses hand-crafted features as a basis for analysis. To address this, we learn a latent
space that captures gene-like structures from raw RNA-Seq data. We find that our proposed model
successfully recovers information on gene sequence similarity, mutations, and chromosomal rear-
rangements.
The transcriptome is a subset of all possible sequences of the genome that are used by the cell at
any given moment and constitutes less than 2% of all genomic sequences (if we consider only one
cell type). Of this transcriptome, only a small amount is captured in standard RNA-Seq analysis
pipelines, mainly transcripts that encode proteins (total of 20-60k sequences). The goal of these
pipelines is to count the relative abundance of each transcript in the cell.
The raw data actually contains much more information than just gene abundance, namely patient-
specific mutations and chromosomal rearrangements. RNA-Seq experiments yield very rich data,
that can be informative both in terms of sequence abundance as well as sequence composition.
Reducing this rich data to only the detection of annotated genes (which are ”hand-crafted” features
of the sequence) is not appropriate for analysis. Indeed, although the simple story relating each gene
to a protein is correct to first approximation, there are important phenomena such as gene homology,
patient-specific mutations, translocations and other genomic alterations that are excluded from the
analysis, despite their presence in the data.
In this work, we consider the problem of including the rich patient-specific sequence informa-
tion from RNA-Seq data via a continuous representation that will account for both gene expres-
sion as well as mutations and chromosomal rearrangements. We propose a model which learns
gene-like representations from the raw patient-specific sequence RNA-Seq data. We study how this
model handles situations that are standard in cancer genomics but considered edge case in standard
pipelines.
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
2 Related work
2.1	The s tandard RNA-Seq analysis pipeline
Once RNA is extracted from cells in the lab, it is processed by a sequencer. Individual RNA se-
quences are fragmented into short 100-200 base pair sequences (each of which is called a read)
before entering the sequencer and then processed in bulk. A sequencing experiment produces a vast
amount (billions) of short character sequences (reads, R), each character (A,C,T,G) representing
each of the four nucleic acids (Figure 1A). A good analogy of the way RNA-Seq experiments are
done would be to compare the output of a sequencer to the output of a shredder. To deal with a
shredder-generated output, a reference text would be helpful. This reference text (approximately
like the text of the shredded document) is used to look-up the shredded sequences to determine their
regions of origin in the text. This works well so long as the true underlying text and the reference
are fairly close and that their differences are local. Unfortunately, this assumption breaks in the case
of cancer-induced mutations.
A
Iiciiiscript
mutated gene
3-mers
Standard pipeline
ATTGCTGAGCTGGAGAlITCGGA
Attgctgag tggagattcgga
TGA
GAG
AGG
GGT
GTG
TGG
Figure 1: A) Standard RNA-Seq analysis pipeline, including alignment of sequencing reads.
B)Translocation between two chromosomes and creation of a fusion gene AB. Kmers overlapping
the fusion will partially match both original sequences. C) Every patient-specific mutation creates
at least k new kmers. Here new kmers are shown for k=3
A reference genome exists for most of the widely studied species, see Figure 1 for the standard
processing pipeline. In this reference genome, gene locations and exact sequence are annotated
according to the current revision. The reference genome is renewed every five years or so, to take
into account new discoveries in genomics. Zielezinski and colleagues report that sequence alignment
methods fail in the edge cases of high sequence similarity (homology) (Zielezinski et al., 2017).
Moreover, multiple sequence alignment is an NP-hard problem (Chatzou et al., 2016), that is sped
up using heuristics and yielding the ”most probable” alignment, which adds a level of uncertainty to
results.
In the event of a chromosomal translocation (Figure 1B), a common occurrence in cancer, reads that
cover both parts will only be matched to the un-fused sequences based on a sequence similarity score
(typically < 50% match) (Zielezinski et al., 2017). This makes chromosomal rearrangements such
as translocations undetectable by RNA-Seq, since they are not part of the reference genome. For
this specific case, we deem the reference genome inappropriate. Indeed, reference based methods
yield a relative abundance measurement of genes, which are by definition, hand crafted features.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
2.2	Merging RNA-Seq experiments with additional genomic data
Cancer cells have often unconventional genomes, many showing chromosomal rearrangements,
mutations, copy-number variations (CNV) and repeated regions(Weinstein et al., 2013). The cor-
rect identification of these rearrangements is a non trivial challenge for reference genome-based
pipelines, since these modifications are not included in the reference genome.
Many recent advances in the field of cancer research have become possible either by combining
standard pipeline-derived RNA-Seq data with other sequence-specific data, such as SNP arrays,
miRNA-Seq and even whole genome sequencing (Koboldt et al., 2012; Gerstung et al., 2015; Hu
et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2013; Weinstein et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2017). While combining data does
yield good results, genomic variant analysis almost always requires a predefined sequence of interest
to orient the search.
Other teams preferred to develop reference-free methods for variant calling. One such reference-
free method, km, stores n-grams (also known as kmers in computational biology) coming directly
from reads into a De Bruijn graph-like structure (Audemard et al., 2018). They argue that since
only a small part of the genome is expressed, variant detection can be limited to the transcriptome.
Their tool, km, uses only the abundance of these kmers in patients to detect genomic abnormalities.
While this method does not depend on any type of reference genome, it still shares the same problem
as the ones that combine RNA-Seq with other experiments; all these methods require a predefined
sequence for analysis. In other words, to find an abnormality in the cancer samples, one must know
in advance the exact abnormal sequence to look for.
2.3	Representation learning for biological sequences
After the success of distributed representations in NLP (Mikolov et al., 2013) some teams have
attempted to create distributed representations for biological sequences. Asgari & Mofrad (2015)
adapted Word2Vec to create BioVec, distributed representations for biological sequences, based
solely on sequence similarity. They report that their representation captures biochemical properties
of proteins such as mass, volume and charge. Jaeger et al. (2018) has also extended the model to
chemical compounds and observe that modeling chemical compounds with vectors yields a better
performance in bioactivity prediction tasks. This work focuses on a different aspect of the problem.
We consider the idea of using an unsupervised learning approach to directly learn a representation
for RNA-Seq data from scratch, without the need for a reference genome and the corresponding
definition of genes as clearly delineated and non-overlapping regions in the overall sequence.
3	Method
We represent the raw data as R, where each read r ∈ R is a sequence of length 100, where rj ∈
{A, C, G, T }. We define a kmer (ngram) x of length k as a subsequence for some read r from
positions l to l + k - 1:
x = rl:l+k-1
Each patient i generates a set Ri of reads. We extract kmers of length 24 from all the reads Ri to
generate the kmer table Xi , one for each patient. Table Xi contain Ki unique kmers from reads Ri .
Xi = {x1,x2, ..., xKi}
This table as well as the patient’s id are used by our model to learn the kmer representation space.
The method uses the factorized embedding model (Trofimov et al., 2017) combined with an RNN.
This specific method was previously shown to provide a multi-view embedding of genomics data.
We however found that it lacked patient-specific information on the RNA sequence level. Our mod-
ification of this model allows for the integration of this sequence information to the factorized em-
beddings model. Concretely, the model is given a pair of inputs < Xj, Ii > and predicts the
corresponding count yij . We represent each nucleotide as a one - hot vector. For example, adenine
and cytidine, A and C, would be represented by respectively [0, 0, 0, 1] and [0, 0, 1, 0].
For each input pair, a corresponding pair of embeddings < uij , vi > is then computed. For vi ,
a lookup table is used, so each patient has its own embedding coordinates in patient embedding
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
sample #1
MLP
Figure 2: The model, where we predict the count of each kmer based on the their sequence (Using
an RNN) and the sample id. We can then visualise the learned embeddings, or use them for some
downtream tasks.
kmer	sample	count
ACTGC... ATCCAGT	sample #1	100
ACTGC... ATCCAGT	sample #2	30
CGGTA...GCAGCAA	sample #1	10
CGGTA...GCAGCAA	sample #2	10
space. For uij , we use a bidirectional LSTM to compute the embedding coordinates (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), where the equations are given by:
ft =	σ(Wfxt + Uf ht-1 + bf)	(1)
it =	σ(Wixt + Uiht-1 + bi)	(2)
ot =	σ(Woxt + Uoht-1 + bo)	(3)
Ct =	tanh(WcXt + Ucht-I + bc)	(4)
Ct =	ft Θ ct-i + it Θ Ct	(5)
ht =	ot tanh(ct).	(6)
The embeddings uij are then computed as follow:
→
uij
flinear ([hrnn , crnn , hrnn , c
rnn
]).
(7)
Where h^n and CUn are the hidden states of the forward RNN, and hj and c→m are the hidden
states of the backward RNN. A linear function flinear is learned to reduce the dimensionality of the
embedding uij for visualisation purposes.
The two embeddings are then fed to a MLP to predict the corresponding count:
yij = fpred([uij , vi])∙	(8)
We use the quadratic loss as a training objective:
L = X(yij - yij)2	⑼
i,j
Intuitively, kmers that come from the same gene would have the same count, since gene expression
is counted in terms of transcripts. The model is thus encouraged to group kmers in embedding space
U that generally occurs together across all patients. Similarly, patients that have the same kmer
occurrence profile should be grouped together in the embedding space V . A plan of the model is
presented in Figure 2.
4	Experiments
We divide our experiments into three tasks. Each task aims to test the behaviour of our model when
presented with DNA sequences that have specific properties. Using all reads from an organism
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
would be optimal for experiments however the scale of the computation is currently intractable (as
discussed in the Limitations section). Instead we focus on just specific regions of the genome that
contain only a few genes. We determine this region using the a standard alignment pipeline but
include the entire region of the gene (not just exons) and also use the aligned data per patient which
includes patient specific mutations.
•	Task 1: Embedding of genes sequences of high similarity.
•	Task 2: Embedding of genes with different sequences
•	Task 3: Embedding of genes that participate in a chromosomal translocation.
4.1	Data
For all our experiments we used aligned, unquantified RNA-Seq data (BAM format files) from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (Weinstein et al., 2013). The dataset contains 149 patients with
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), a cancer well known for its multiple chromosomal rearrangements.
For all our experiments, we isolated the reads (Figure 1) that span specific regions of interest, in
order to speed up computation (Table 1). Upon extraction of the reads from the BAM files, we
obtained a total of 22,008,292 kmers for all patients, with an average of 125,000 kmers per patient.
We excluded kmers with occurrence of < 2, as these are most likely sequencing errors. All kmer
occurrences were log-normalized.
Table 1: Regions of interest isolated for all experiments in this paper
gene name	chromosome	start-stop	manuscript section
ZFX	chrX	24148934-24216255	4.3
ZFY	chrY	2934416-2982508	4.3
PML	chr15	73994673-74047812	4.4
RARα	chr17	40309171-40357643	4.4
4.2	Experimental details
The Bidirectional LSTM model had 2 layers with 256 hidden units. The size of each embedding (i.e.
the output of the bi-RNN and sample id) was of size 2 for visualisation purposes. The prediction
model is a two layers MLP of size 150 and 100 units respectively with the ReLU activation function.
Each model was trained for 200 epochs with RMSProp with a learning rate of 0.001, α = 0.99 and
a momentum of 0.
4.3	Task 1: Representation of genes with highly similar sequences
For the first task, we wanted to test how kmers from two highly similar sequences would be embed-
ded. The human genome contains many highly similar sequences and it is generally believed that
similar sequences can have a similar function in the cell (Pearson, 2013). Although this is not al-
ways the case, we chose two genes that share a significant amount of overlap in sequence: ZFY and
ZFX genes. It has been reported that they encode proteins of almost identical structure, containing
13 zinc fingers (Palmer et al., 1990; Schneider-Gadicke et al., 1989). While these genes are similar
in sequence, they are located on two different chromosomes in the genome. Moreover, ZFY gene
is only present in male patients, since it is located on the Y chromosome (Palmer et al., 1990). We
argue that this is a case where standard gene annotation separates these two genes into two features
but does not take into account their homology.
We obtained the reference sequences from the reference genome and found that they share 206
kmers (Figure 3A) in the protein coding regions. We expected the model to group the common (all
sexes) kmers in one region and possibly push aside in embedding space the kmers that were ZFY
gene-exclusive.
While our model does not use a reference genome for representation, in order to identify the kmers
in embedding space, we obtained the reference sequences (GRCh38/hg38 Assembly of December
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
swə=Ea 8fflEφLL
scωleɑΦ(BIΛI
Figure 3: Embedding of homologous genes A) Embedding space for kmers in male and female
patients. ZFY and ZFX genes share 206 kmers. Points are coloured according to their matching
sequence of origin
2013) for both genes. We then coloured each kmer in embedding space according to the gene
sequence it belongs to. We also annotated kmers that match both sequences. As expected, kmers
from female patients were all grouped in the same region, while ZFY-gene exclusive kmers from
male patients were located in another region of the embedding space (Figure 3A).
This result supports our claim that when genes share a large part of their sequence, a representation
that groups these similar sequences together would contain more information. Although standard
pipelines would label these genes as different features and quantify them separately, reads that would
fall in the common region would be ambiguous (i.e. matching both regions) and therefore would be
either clipped or redistributed according to the mapping software strategy (Kim et al., 2013). We
argue that our representation captures both gene expression (via the kmer counts) as well as the gene
sequence similarity.
4.4	Task 2: Representation of genes with different sequences
For our second task, we tested the embeddings model using two gene regions that are highly different
(no homology). This task verifies how the model would arrange in embedding space kmers that come
from different genes. Unlike the previous task, the two gene sequences are very different and the
model has to learn sequence similarity between kmers as well as kmer abundance variations along
the gene. This task is in line with the problems that come from scaling up our method to an entire
organism.
The first gene of interest that we chose is the promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML), a tumor suppres-
sor gene, involved in the regulation of p53 response to oncogenic signals. The second gene is the
retinoic acid receptor alpha gene (RARα), a gene involved in many core cellular functions such as
transcription of clock genes. These genes do not share a significant amount of kmers and serve as
an example to test how the model will arrange kmers when the sequences are different.
By matching patient kmers to each of the exons from the reference genome (we used GRCh38/hg38
Assembly of December 2013) of the PML and RARα genes, we notice that the embedding model
grouped kmers in embedding space by matching exon (Figure 4A). Exons are subsequences of the
transcripts that actually encode the protein (Figure 1A). The information recovered by the standard
RNA-Seq analysis pipeline corresponds to the exons for these two genes, since they code for both
proteins. We conclude that our model recovers correctly information obtainable by the standard
RNA-Seq analysis pipeline, when looking at two protein coding regions.
Moreover we observe that there seems to be a discrepancy in the kmer counts within the gene
transcripts. Indeed, for both genes, some exons seem to be present at higher counts (Figure 4B).
Although the canonical gene expression model states that each transcript is copied in its entirety
before being spliced and then translated to a protein (Figure 1A), there exists the highly documented
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
PML and RARA genes for 06465320
kmer coverage of exon 4 of PML gene
Consensus plot Of PML and RARA genes for 027IeCO2
Consensus plot of PML and RARA genes for 02e23daa
Consensus plot of PML and RARA genes for 06465320
RARa gene exons
PML and RARA genes for 02e23daa
PML and RARA genes for 0271ec02
kmer CoVel
Ie Of exon 1 in RARA gene
PML gene exons
Figure 4: Kmer embedding space. A) Kmer embedding space is shown with kmers of 3 individuals.
Points are coloured according to the corresponding kmer position in exons for both PML gene (blue),
RARa gene (red) and unknown kmers in grey. B) Kmer embedding space is shown with kmers of
3 individuals. Points are coloured according to the kmer counts C) Actual kmer coverage (blue) of
exons and prediction by the model (in green)
phenomenon of sequencing bias (Benjamini & Speed, 2012). This is an entirely experimental bias
that is explained by the fact that RNA-Seq is done using an enzyme, polymerase. This enzyme has
a bias in terms of G-C content of sequences.
The occurrence of guanine and cytosine (G and C) is measured by counting the G or C nucleotides
and then dividing by the total length of the sequence. For example, the sequence AATTGAGCGA
would have a G-C content of (3G + 1C)/10 = 0.4. We verified the relative exon composition and
found that in general, kmers with a higher count overlap exons with a lower G-C occurrence (no
figure shown).
Moreover, we compared the model’s predicted kmer count and the actual count over various exons
from both genes. We found that the predicted kmer count is proportional to the predicted kmer
count, which confirms that our model captures fine-grained kmer abundance variations along exons
(Figure 4C).
4.5	Task 3: Detection of abnormal genomic structures
The PML and RARα genes are also often involved in a chromosomal translocation (Figure 1B),
which yields a new fusion gene the PML-RARα in patients that have acute promyelocytic leukemia
(de The et al., 1991; Lavau & Dejean, 1994). In our dataset, 10% of the patients are of the acute
promyelocytic leukemia subtype and the choice of these two genes serves the dual role for testing
the embedding model on two different genes as well as detecting a chromosomic translocation and
resulting fusion gene.
Upon further examination of the embedding space for kmers in task 2, we noticed that a large amount
of the kmers from both genes were not included in the exonic sequences according to the annotation
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 5: Individual-exclusive kmers. A) Heatmap showing the proportion of individual-exclusive
kmers for each pairwise comparisons. B) Patient-exclusive kmers are highlighted in red. Green
circle highlights kmers that span the translocation.
NnSJBX
B2PEN30
ZI3EI0
OZmSgWO
eəəs寸060
Zoumzo
(Figure 4B). These sequences are excluded for any of the following reasons: i) the kmer sequence
does not match (exact match) the reference sequence (example in figure 1C) ii) the kmer sequence is
not included in the exonic region (3’ and 5’-UTR and introns) or iii) the kmer matches to the t15:17
translocation site in the given patient (example in figure 1B). To better address this observation, we
performed pairwise comparisons of patient kmer sets and found that patient 02e23daa has the most
different transcriptome, with at most 50% kmers difference (Figure 5A).
We then compared patient-exclusive kmer sets (Figure 5B in red) and found that most patients have
between 3-10k exclusive kmers. We isolated the kmers from patient 02e23daa and reassembled
them into a consensus sequence. We used the software BLAST to perform multiple alignment of this
sequence in the reference genome. We report that half of this sequence matches to the PML gene and
the other half to the RARα gene, a scenario matching that of a fusion gene, result of a chromosomal
translocation (Figure 1B). This was confirmed by verifying the clinical data for patient 02e23daa,
where the translocation was previously detected and annotated in the clinic (figure not shown). From
these results, we conclude that our model captures real genomic abnormalities and allows to extract
directly from the kmer embedding space the abnormal sequence.
5	Limitations
The main limitation of our model is its scalability. In all the tasks performed in this paper, we
heavily restrained the number of kmers in the dataset. Indeed, without pre-filtering the BAM files,
each sample would generate approximately 10-30 billion kmers (compared to 125,000 per sample
in the current dataset). While this number is very high, we suggest that since kmers are overlapping
by definition, it would be possible to sample the kmers while training and therefore greatly reduce
the number of kmers seen by the model, thus reducing the processing time. Finally, we have not
yet explored parallelizing the training onto multiple GPUs, which would greatly reduce the training
time.
Finally, while we used the pre-aligned BAM file to filter our regions of interest, our goal is to
optimize this model to move away from reference genomes entirely. To do so, we plan on using
only two ”seed” kmers and using the total kmer table, as a means to extract the kmers of interest.
Indeed, exploring all paths supported by kmers between the two seeds is an (almost) reference-free
method to generate kmer tables, without relying on the alignment product.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
6	Conclusion
In this work we propose a model which learns gene-like representations from the raw RNA-Seq
data. We show that this approach does not rely on the reference genome used in standard pipelines
and instead learns a common representation by looking at multiple patients. We study how this
model handles situations in cancer which are problematic for the standard RNA-Seq pipeline, such
as homologous genes and translocations.
We believe that this model could extract genotype information from data, which is difficult to ob-
serve using standard alignment-based pipelines. This extracted information may provide a founda-
tion for future methods to build on and better understand the underlying biology.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially funded by the Canadian Institute for Health Research (CIHR), a grant from
the U.S. National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program (grant number: DGE-
1356104), and the Institut de valorisation des donnees (IVADO). This work utilized the supercom-
puting facilities managed by the Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms, NSERC, Compute
Canada, and Calcul Quebec.
References
Ehsaneddin Asgari and Mohammad R K Mofrad. Continuous Distributed Representation of Biolog-
ical Sequences for Deep Proteomics and Genomics. 2015 PloS one. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0141287.
Enc AUdemard, Patrick Gendron, Vincent-PhiliPPe Lavallee, Josee Hebert, GUy Sauvageau, and Se-
bastien Lemieux. Target variant detection in leukemia using unaligned RNA-Seq reads. bioRxiv,
2018. doi: 10.1101/295808.
Yuval Benjamini and Terence P SPeed. Summarizing and correcting the GC content bias in high-
throughPut sequencing. 2012 Nucleic acids research. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks001.
Maria Chatzou, Cedrik Magis, Jia-Ming Chang, Carsten Kemena, Giovanni Bussotti, Ionas Erb,
and Cedric Notredame. MultiPle sequence alignment modeling: methods and aPPlications. 2016
Briefings in Bioinformatics. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbv099.
H de The, C Lavau, A Marchio, C Chomienne, L Degos, and A Dejean. The PML-RAR alpha
fusion mRNA generated by the t(15;17) translocation in acute Promyelocytic leukemia encodes a
functionally altered RAR. Cell, 1991.
Jianjiong Gao, BUlent Arman Aksoy, Ugur Dogrusoz, Gideon Dresdner, Benjamin Gross, S Onur
Sumer, Yichao Sun, Anders Jacobsen, Rileen Sinha, Erik Larsson, Ethan Cerami, Chris Sander,
and Nikolaus Schultz. Integrative analysis of comPlex cancer genomics and clinical Profiles using
the cBioPortal. 2013 Science signaling. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004088.
Moritz Gerstung, Andrea Pellagatti, Luca Malcovati, Aristoteles Giagounidis, Matteo G Della Porta,
Martin Jadersten, Hamid Dolatshad, Amit Verma, Nicholas C P Cross, Paresh Vyas, Sally Killick,
Eva Hellstrom-Lindberg, Mario Cazzola, Elli Papaemmanuil, Peter J Campbell, and Jacqueline
Boultwood. Combining gene mutation with gene exPression data imProves outcome Prediction
in myelodysplastic syndromes. 2015 Nature communications. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6901.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural COmPutatiOn, 1997.
doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
Yongli Hu, Takeshi Hase, Hui Peng Li, Shyam Prabhakar, Hiroaki Kitano, See Kiong Ng, Samik
Ghosh, and Lawrence Jin Kiat Wee. A machine learning approach for the identification of key
markers involved in brain development from single-cell transcriptomic data. BMC genOmics,
2016. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-3317-7.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Sabrina Jaeger, Simone Fulle, and Samo Turk. Mol2vec: Unsupervised Machine Learning Approach
with Chemical Intuition. 2018 Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling. doi: 10.1021/acs.
jcim.7b00616.
Daehwan Kim, Geo Pertea, Cole Trapnell, Harold Pimentel, Ryan Kelley, and Steven L Salzberg.
TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions and gene
fusions. Genome Biology, 2013. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-4-r36.
Daniel C. Koboldt et al. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. 2012 Nature.
doi: 10.1038/nature11412.
C Lavau and A Dejean. The t(15;17) translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Leukemia,
1994.
Keqin Liu, Li He, Zhichao Liu, Junmei Xu, Yuan Liu, Qifan Kuang, Zhining Wen, and Menglong
Li. Mutation status coupled with RNA-sequencing data can efficiently identify important non-
significantly mutated genes serving as diagnostic biomarkers of endometrial cancer. 2017 BMC
bioinformatics. doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1891-6.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient Estimation of Word Repre-
sentations in Vector Space. 2013 arXiv:1301.3781.
M S Palmer, P Berta, A H Sinclair, B Pym, and P N Goodfellow. Comparison of human ZFY
and ZFX transcripts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 1990.
William R Pearson. An introduction to sequence similarity ”homology” searching. 2013 Current
protocols in bioinformatics. doi: 10.1002/0471250953.bi0301s42.
A Schneider-Gadicke, P Beer-Romero, L G Brown, R Nussbaum, and D C Page. ZFX has a gene
structure similar to ZFY, the putative human sex determinant, and escapes X inactivation. 1989
Cell.
Assya Trofimov, Joseph Paul Cohen, Claude Perreault, Yoshua Bengio, and Sebastien Lemieux. Un-
covering the gene usage of human tissue cells with joint factorized embeddings. In International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Workshop on Computational Biology (WCB), 2017.
O Valbuena, K B Marcu, C M Croce, K Huebner, M Weigert, and R P Perry. Chromosomal locations
of mouse immunoglobulin genes. 1978 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
John N Weinstein, Eric A Collisson, Gordon B Mills, Kenna R Mills Shaw, Brad A Ozenberger,
Kyle Ellrott, Ilya Shmulevich, Chris Sander, and Joshua M Stuart. The Cancer Genome Atlas
Pan-Cancer analysis project. Nature genetics, 2013. doi: 10.1038/ng.2764.
Andrzej Zielezinski, Susana Vinga, Jonas Almeida, and Wojciech M Karlowski. Alignment-free
sequence comparison: benefits, applications, and tools. Genome biology, 2017. doi: 10.1186/
s13059-017-1319-7.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
7	Appendix I
We generated a synthetic dataset of kmer counts. We created 20 strings of randomly selected
A, T, C, G characters that we termed ”genes”. We then sampled 5 individual count values for the
genes from a Poisson distribution (Figure 6 C).
Figure 6: Synthetic dataset embedding experiment A) Kmer embedding space is shown with kmers
of 5 individuals. Points are coloured according to the corresponding kmer count value B) Kmer
embedding space is shown with kmers of 5 individuals. Points are coloured according to the corre-
sponding gene C) Synthetic dataset kmer counts for 5 individuals
We trained the latent transcriptome model using this synthetic dataset and found that kmers grouped
first by kmer similarity of sequence (Figure 6B). We also found that kmers grouped by kmer counts
in specific patients (Figure 7 shows a couple examples). From here we conclude that both kmer
sequence and kmer count are taken into account by the model to build embedding coordinates for
kmers.
More investigation is needed to test the relative importance the sequence has over the kmer count,
however, from this synthetic dataset experiment we conclude that kmers are first and foremost
matched by sequence and then by similar kmer count profile across samples.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 7: Synthetic dataset embedding experiment A) Kmer embedding space is shown with kmers
of 5 individuals. Points are coloured according to the corresponding kmer count value B) Kmer
embedding space is shown with kmers of 5 individuals. Points are coloured according to the corre-
sponding gene C) Synthetic dataset kmer counts for 5 individuals
12