Figure 1:	Kittyhawk Data processing pipeline, left (top to bottom): Whole-genome sequencing isperformed using a tumor biopsy and PBMC, Variant and artifact catalogue are constructed usinga consensus of Strelka, LoFreq, Mutect and a simple caller, pileup, respectively. Artifact readsare filtered such that only variants occurring once are retained. Mapping quality and variant basequality filters are applied to both datasets. Finally the datasets are balanced and the CNN is trainedto convergence. Right (top to bottom): Both cfDNA and synthetic cfDNA admixtures have variantcatalogues constructed using pileup, reads are then filtered by their variant allele frequency, thenthe mapping quality and variant base quality filters are applied. Reads then receive inference scoresfrom Kittyhawk and may be used for downstream analysis.
Figure 2:	Top: Representation of a read and its alignment as seen by kittyhawk, Bottom: Genomiccontext is appended to the ends of the read. Zeroes are padded for non-context features.
Figure 3: Kittyhawk Signature Analysis (from left): a) COSMIC signatures associated with Tobacco(top) and Melanoma (bottom) from Alexandrov et al. (2013). b) Tri-nucleotide frequencies fromsample-specific Tumor and PBMC reads. Specific tri-nucleotides associated with Tobacco (purple)and UV radiation (green). c) Correlation of relative difference in tri-nucleotide frequencies andmean activiations of Kittyhawk.
Figure 4: PPV, enrichment, and sensitivity of CA0044 synthetic cfDNA.
Figure 1: NYGC pre-processing pipeline.
Figure 2: NYGC somatic SNV/indel pipeline.
Figure 3: NYGC somatic WGS CNV/SV pipeline.
Figure 4:	NYGC somatic WES CNV pipeline.
Figure 5:	The NYGC custom multi-step SNV/indel filteringDefault caller filters. SNVs and indels are filtered using the default filtering criteria as nativelyimplemented in each of the callers. For Pindel and Scalpel (natively germline callers) we usecustom in-house scripts for filtering. For each caller we keep these variants:•	LoFreq: FILTER=PASS•	muTect: variants with “PASS” in the filter field of the VCF file, which is equivalent to“KEEP” in the text file•	Strelka: FILTER=PASS•	Pindel: FILTER=PASS•	Scalpel: FILTER=PASSTriallelic positions. The latest revision of the pipeline removes triallelic positions. Some SNVcallers (e.g. muTect) remove them by default, and our internal investigation showed that triallelicsites within a sample are by and large due to an unmatched normal, not observing the secondallele in the normal because of low coverage in the normal at that locus, or mapping artifacts.
Figure 6: NYGC somatic CNV/SV filtering and annotation pipeline.
Figure 6: NYGC somatic CNV annotation pipeline.
