Figure 1: Two images: The imagein panel (a) can be classified withhigh confidence as containing a fluteby contemporary computer vision al-gorithms. However, these same algo-rithms struggle to learn the concept of“sameness” as exemplified by the im-age with the two curves shown in panel(b). The image in panel (b) is sam-pled from the SVRT challenge (Fleuretet al., 2011).
Figure 2:	The Synthetic Visual Reasoning Test. (a) and (b) show an example pair of Problem 1 (same-different up to translation) and Problem 2 (three objects arranged in a line with the largest one in themiddle), respectively. (c) Nine CNNs corresponding to different combinations of hyper-parameterswere trained on each of the twenty-three SVRT problems. Shown are the ranked accuracies ofthe best-performing network for each problem. The x-axis indicates the arbitrary problem labelprovided in (Fleuret et al., 2011). CNNs from this high-throughput analysis were found to produceuniformly lower accuracies on same-different problems (red bars) than on spatial-relation problems(blue bars). The single purple bar corresponds to a problem which required detecting both a same-different relation and a spatial relation simultaneously.
Figure 3:	Sample PSVRT images. Four imagesare shown representing the four joint categoriesof SD (grouped by columns) and SR (groupedby rows). An image is considered Same or Dif-ferent depending on whether it contains identical(left column) or different (right column) squarebit patterns. An image is considered Horizontal(top row) or Vertical (bottom row) depending onwhether the orientation of the displacement be-tween the items is greater than 45°. The imageswere generated with the baseline image parame-ters: m = 4, n = 60, k = 2.
Figure 4: Training-to-acquisition (TTA) curves over PSVRT image parameters. TTA denotes the number oftraining examples needed for a CNN to reach 95% training accuracy. Training used 20 million images, and ifaccuracy never reached 95% in all of 10 random initializations we consider the problem “never” learned. Thefigures only show the minimum TTAs out of 10 random initializations in each condition. Three curves - SD(red), SD with a large CNN, (purple) and SR (blue) - are plotted. The three figures display TTA curves overeach of three image variability parameters: item size (a), image size (b) and number of items (c).
Figure 5: (a) An example of two-item same-different problem posed for a sort-of-CLEVR image.
