Figure 1: Encoding with a Bloomier filter. W0 is an inexact reconstruction of W from a compressedprojection X. To retrieve the value wi0,j , we hash its location and exclusive-or the correspondingentries of X together with a computed mask M. If the resulting value falls within the range [0, 2r-1),it is used for wi0,j, otherwise, it is treated as a zero. The red path on the left shows a false positive dueto collisions in X and random M value.
Figure 2: There is an exponential relationship between t and the number of false positives (red) aswell as the measured model accuracy with the incurred errors (blue).
Figure 3: Weightless operates layer-by-layer, alternating between simplification and lossy encoding.
Figure 4: Weightless exploits sparsity more effectively than Deep Compression. By setting pruningthresholds to produce specific nonzero ratios, we can quantify sparsity scaling. There is no loss ofaccuracy at any point in this plot.
Figure 5: Plot of retraining (as described in Section 3.2) VGG16’s FC-1 after encoding FC-0 in aBloomier filter. The baseline validation accuracy (on 25000 samples) is 30% and after encoding FC-0,with a Bloomier filter, this increases to 33%. As the plots hows, after a few epochs pass the errorintroduced by the lossy encoding is recovered. In comparison, test accuracy after encoding FC-0and before retraining FC-1 is 38.0% and goes down by 2% to 36.0% which maintains the model’sbaseline performance.
Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis of t with respect to the number of weight clusters, k, for FC-0 inLeNet-300-100. As per Figure 2, model error decreases with the number of false positives, which aredetermined by the difference between t and k. This is emphasized here as k = 8 performs strictlybetter than higher k values as it results in the strongest encoding given t.
Figure 7: Demonstrating iso-accuracy comparisons between previous state-of-the-art DNN com-pression techniques and Weightless for FC-0 in LeNet5. In comparison to Table 3, we see that withrespect to accuracy, Weightless’ compression ratio scales significantly better than Deep Compression.
