Figure 1: Our algorithm learns a robot’s physical design jointly with the control policy. Here weshow the learned designs evolving over time for the Hopper (top left), the Walker2d (top right) andthe Ant (bottom), each with the default Roboschool design for comparison. Scale is fixed for eachrobot. Note that these designs correspond to modes of the distribution over robot designs that ouralgorithm maintains during training.
Figure 2: From left to right: the default Hopper, Walker2d, and Ant robots. The Hopper andWalker2d are constrained to walk in a line, while the Ant can walk anywhere in the plane.
Figure 3: Training curves that show the evolution of reward across training iterations for the Hopper,Walker2d, and Ant environments over eight different random seeds. The black dashed line corre-sponds to the highest achievable performance of the corresponding baseline robot. In other figures,we display the best-performing checkpoint of each run. Therefore, we make each training curvetransparent after it stops improving.
Figure 4: Here, we compare locomotion of default and learned robots, visualizing both their physicaldesign and corresponding learned gaits. We pick the best results for Hopper and Ant, and two of thebest results for Walker2d (due to diversity in gaits). Note that for each robot type, we show a blendof a fixed number of frames in the same time interval, allowing direct comparison between the speedwith which different designs are able to locomote.
Figure 5: Plots of (left) the entropy of the mixture weights and (right) the marginal variance of eachparameter throughout training. The curves are normalized such that all initial variances are one.
Figure 6: A visualization of accumulated reward for different friction values. The controllers andlearned design were trained in an environment with a friction value of 0.8. We finetuned the con-trollers (but not the designs) for both the learned and hand-crafted designs for 10M timesteps foreach friction value. Rewards are reported as an average over 100 episodes.
