Figure 1: a) Univariate Shapley value. The values suggest that ‘surprisingly’, ‘worst’, ‘awful’ arethe most influential features, however it does not explain feature interactions b) Using Shapleyexplanation map E, we plot the Directed Explanation graph G using our method. An edge i → jrepresents the conditional influence of word j when word i is present. We can then use the propertiesof Graph G to derive notions of Mutual and Directional Redundancy, as well as Influential Features.
Figure 2: Post-hoc accuracy evaluated on Mutual Redundancy masking derived from graph H.
Figure 3: Comparison of explanation methods on a feature removal task. Methods are evaluatedon their ability to maintain post-hoc accy while removing the least influential features. We applyPageRank to graph G to derive a univariate ranking based on feature redundancy. We compare toother explanation methods by iteratively masking the lowest ranked features. Note that we cannot runSh-Tay and Sh-Exc on COPD due to their computational issues with large numbers of features.
Figure 4: We explore samples from MNIST and CIFAR10. Middlerow: we identify Mutually Redundant features from graph H,indicated by the white pixels in each image. Bottom row: Weapply redundancy ranking on graph G and show a heatmap ofPageRank scores; important nodes have higher PageRank scores.
Figure 5: Comparison of graph G and graph H for the the given IMDB example "The movie wasthe worst; surprisingly awful", which is classified as negative sentiment. Note that the sinks andsources of graph G and graph H are reversed in terms of influential and redundant features. I.E. thesource nodes of graph G represent redundant features, whereas the sink nodes of graph H represent(directionally) redundant features.
Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis of graph H to parameter γ. We compare the density of H as γ increasesto the post-hoc accuracy after masking all directionally redundant features found in H.
Figure 7: Posthoc Accuracy evaluated on Mutual Redundancy masking derived from graph H.
Figure 8: Adjacency matrix for graph G, averaged over Smoker and Nonsmoker subgroups anddisplayed as a heatmap.
