Figure 1: We visualize the electricity load TS in a region of California to show diversified periods.
Figure 2: In the right part, we visualize the overall data flows for our framework, DEPTS. In the mid-dle part, we plot the integral structure of three layer-by-layer expansion branches in the expansionmodule fθ . In the left part, we depict the detailed residual connections within a single layer.
Figure 3: Performance comparisons of N-BEATS and DEPTS (ours) on synthetic data, in which wesimulate different periodic dependencies, such as linear, quadratic, and cubic.
Figure 4: We compare the forecasts of different models (in the left side) and visualize the intermedi-ate states within DEPTS (in the middle and right parts), where DEPTS-P denotes the forecasts fromthe global periodicity, DEPTS-L denotes the forecasts from the local momenta, and DEPTS is thesummation of these two parts, as illustrated in Section 4.2.
Figure 5: Detailed architectures of the local block and the periodic block in DEPTS.
Figure 7: Performance comparisons of N-BEATS and DEPTS with different lookback lengths (L)and number of periods (J).
Figure 8: The residual structures of DEPTS and its three ablated variants, where the dashed linedenotes the removed connection.
Figure 9:	We show two cases on Electricity dataset. It is clear to see that other than followingsome inherent periodicity, the real PTS signals usually have various irregular oscillations at differenttime steps, while DEPTS can produce more stable forecasts by analyzing local momenta and globalperiodicity simultaneously. For these two cases with evident and stable periodicity, DEPTS reliesmore on the periodic forecasts (DEPTS-P) and thus achieves more competitive and stable results.
Figure 10:	We show two cases on Traffic dataset. We can see that DEPTS is able to characterizequite different periodic effects. For the upper case, there are unexpected peaks at different timesteps. For the bottom case, there are different types of periodic oscillations. Similar to cases inFigure 9, DEPTS has estimated roughly consistent periodic states zt and then combined DEPTS-Pand DEPTS-L to produce stable and accurate forecasts.
Figure 11: We show two cases on Caiso dataset. These two cases present relatively regular oscil-lations, and thus N-BEATS with enough lookback lengths can also produce pretty good forecasts.
Figure 12: We show two cases on NP dataset. We can see that these cases are rather difficult, andboth N-BEATS and DEPTS struggle to make sufficiently accurate forecasts. Nevertheless, as shownin the right side, DEPTS has a relatively stable estimation of the future trending and thus can obtainrelatively good performance in forecasting future curves.
