Figure 1: Schematic of PESNet. Foreach molecular structure (top row), theMetaGNN takes the nuclei graph andparametrizes the WFModel via ω and ωm .
Figure 2: PESNet’s architecture is split into two main components, the MetaGNN and the WFModel.
Figure 3: The energy of H4+ along the first re-action path (Alijah & Varandas, 2008). WhilePESNet and DeepErwin match the barrier heightestimate of the MRCI-D-F12 calculation, PES-Net estimates ≈ 0.27 mEh lower energies. Ref-erence data is taken from Scherbela et al. (2021).
Figure 4: Potential energy surface scan of thehydrogen rectangle. Similar to FermiNet, PES-Net does not produce the fake minimum at 90°.
Figure 5: Potential energy surface scan of thehydrogen chain with 10 atoms. We find ourPESNet to outperform PauliNet and DeepErwinstrictly while matching the results of FermiNetacross all configurations. Reference data is takenfrom Hermann et al. (2020); Pfau et al. (2020);Scherbela et al. (2021); Motta et al. (2017).
Figure 6: Potential energy surface scan of thenitrogen molecule. PESNet yields very simi-lar but slightly higher (≈ 0.37mEh) energiesthan FermiNet. Without the MetaGNN the ac-curacy drops significantly by ≈ 4.3 mEh on av-erage. Reference data is taken from Le Roy et al.
Figure 7: Comparison between the ground and transition states of cyclobutadiene. The top figureshows the total energy plotted in log scale zeroed at -154.68 Eh with light colors for the groundstate and darker colors for the transition state. The bottom figure shows the estimate of the transitionbarrier. Both figures use a logarithmic x-axis. All neural methods estimate the same transitionbarriers in line with the highest MR-CC results at the upper end of the experimental data. Referenceenergies are taken from Hermann et al. (2020); Spencer et al. (2020); Shen & Piecuch (2012).
Figure 8: Edge cases in the construction of our equivariant coordinate system. Circles indicatenuclei and the numbers their charges.
Figure 9: Comparison of different PESNet configurations on cyclobutadiene. The configurations arenamed (#determinant/single-stream width) with light colors for the ground state and darker colorsfor the transition state.
Figure 10: Convergence behavior of PESNet. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean.
