Figure 1: Result of tabular COptiDICE and baseline algorithms in random tabular CMDPs for thevarying number of trajectories and two types of data-collection policies. Plots of (a) correspond tothe case when the data-collection policy is constraint-satisfying, while the data-collection policy isconstraint-violating in the last two plots of (b). The mean of normalized reward performance andthe mean of cost value are reported for 10K runs, where the error bar denotes the standard error.
Figure 2: Result of RWRL control tasks. For each task, we report the reward return and the averagecost. The results are averaged over 5 runs, and the shaded area represents the standard error.
Figure 3: Result on RWRL walker using three dataset configurations with different levels of con-straint satisfaction β: for (a) the data is obtained with β = 0.8 (low-reward-low-cost data), (b)with β = 0.5, and (c) with β = 0.2 (high-reward-high-cost data).
Figure 4: Result of tabular COptiDICE and baseline algorithms in random tabular CMDPs. Plots forthe first two columns in (a) correspond to the case when the cost value of the data-collection policyis 0.09 (corresponding to Figure 1a). Plots for the last two columns in (b) correspond to the casewhen the cost value of the data-collection policy is 0.11 (corresponding to Figure 1b). The meanof normalized reward performance and the mean of cost value are reported for 10K runs, where theerror bar denotes the standard error.
Figure 5: Result of tabular COptiDICE and baseline algorithms in random tabular CMDPs, usingmixture dataset. Plots (a) correspond to the case when the dataset is collected generally by thecost-satisfying policy, i.e. 80% of trajectories are by the cost-satisfying policy and 20% are by thecost-violating policy. Plots (b) correspond to the case when the dataset is collected generally bythe cost-violating policy, i.e. 20% of trajectories are by the cost-satisfying policy and 80% are by thecost-violating policy. The mean (unnormalized) reward value and the mean cost value are reportedfor 10K runs, where the error bar denotes the standard error.
Figure 6: Result of tabular COptiDICE and baseline algorithms in random tabular CMDPs whenthe data-collection policy has limited exploration power. Plots for the first two columns in (a)correspond to the case when the data-collection policy is cost-satisfying. Plots for the last twocolumns in (b) correspond to the case when the data-collection policy is cost-violating (except forthe first row). The first row denotes the case When A = {aj, the second row denotes the casewhen A = {a1, a2}, and the third row denotes the case when A = {a1, a2, a3}. The mean ofnormalized reward performance and the mean of cost value are reported for 10K runs, where theerror bar denotes the standard error.
