Figure 1: Different views of the 3D structureof a protein complex. a. Surface and b. cartoonview of protein Z and its inhibitor.
Figure 2: Same output guarantee of EQUIDOCK. We predict a rigid transformation to place theligand in the binding location w.r.t the receptor. We mathematically guarantee to output the samecomplex structure — UP to an SE(3) transformation — independently of the initial unbound positions,rotations, or roles of both constituents. (RMSD = Root-mean-square deviation of atomic positions)taking between minutes and hours to solve a single example pair, while not being guaranteed to findaccurate complex structures. These methods largely follow the steps: i.) randomly sample a largenumber (e.g., millions) of candidate initial complex structures, ii.) employ a scoring function to rankthe candidates, iii.) adjust and refine the top complex structures based on an energy model (e.g., forcefield). We here take a first step towards tackling these issues by using deep learning models for directprediction of protein complex structures.
Figure 3: Details on EQUIDOCK's Architecture and Losses. a. The message passing operations inIEGMN guarantee pairwise independent SE(3)-equivariance as in Eq. (4), b. We predict keypoints foreach protein that are aligned with the binding pocket location using an additional optimal transport(OT) loss, c. After predicting the docked position, we compute an MSE loss on the ligand, as well asa loss to discourage body intersections.
Figure 4: a. Complex-RMSD distributions (DIPS test set); b. Interface-RMSD distributions (DIPStest set); c. scatter plot for C-RMSD vs I-RMSD (DIPS test set).
Figure 5: Inference running time distri-butions (log10 scale).
Figure 6: Visualization of a protein complex successfully predicted by EquiDock. Note that allother methods find the binding interface on the wrong side of the black protein.
Figure 7: Representation of an amino acid residue and its local coordinate system.
Figure 8: Intuition behind surface features defined in Eq. (16). a. Residues in the core (interior) of aprotein are likely to have a small weighted average of directionally spread neighboring forces, whileb. residues close to the surface receive vector contributions from a narrower space subset and, thus,have larger ρ feature values.
Figure 9: Distribution of our surface feature values defined in Eq. (16) for 500 points uniformlydistributed in the unit circle. One can notice a strong correlation with the depth (i.e. distance tosurface) which is further quantified in Fig. 10. Note that the scale for λ in this synthetic experimentdiffers from that of real proteins.
Figure 10: Distribution of the Spearman rank-order coefficient computed per each protein as thecorrelation between MSMS residues’ depths and our surface features defined in Eq. (16) (for λ = 30).
Figure 11: For points close to the protein surface where the local surface angle is α we can derivea closed form expression for the surface feature defined in Eq. (16) under the assumption of beingsurrounded by infinitely many points at approximately equal distances and equally-spaced . A similarderivation is possible in 3D.
Figure 12: Distance (RMSD) between unbound and bound structures of the DB5.5 dataset revealsthat most of the proteins are relatively rigid. Thus, better datasets are needed to tackle the dockingconformational change problem.
Figure 13: DB5.5 test results: a. Complex-RMSD distributions; b. Interface-RMSD distributions; c.
