Figure 1: Left: the process that a human applies to transform a plasticine dough into a bowl. Right:we use images captured in time sequence to demonstrate how our framework reshapes a plasticinecube into a target airplane. The bottom row indicates the transport priorities found by our frameworkby computing the optimal transport between the current and target shapes. The top row illustrates thepose of the end-effectors selected by our framework based on the transport priorities.
Figure 2: (a) Writer to manipulate a "pen"；(b) given an initial handcrafted position of the "pen", thedifferentiable physics solver can control the “pen“ to minimize the loss; (c) the solver gets stuck andfails to finish the second curve, due to the lack of gradient to push the “pen“ towards the second line.
Figure 3: Writer-v1 in Plas-ticineLab. The bottom-rightfigure shows the target shape.
Figure 4: Visualizations of the placement strategies. We visualize the current and target shapes,transport priorities for contact discovery, and the resulting placement of the manipulators. We show asingle manipulator case using Torus (top), and a multiple-manipulator case using Airplane (bottom)Multiple Manipulator Placement With Heuristic. For multiple manipulator environments, weneed to consider a heuristically defined candidate pose set T, where each pose corresponds with adifferent manipulation strategy. Taking Figure 4 (bottom) as an example, it is more advantageousto use the highlighted pose than the ones drawn with low opacity. Each pose is specified by theorientations of the manipulators and the direction vectors for placing other manipulators in relation tothe first manipulator. For each pose, we employ the single-manipulator placement strategy for the firstmanipulator. Using the first placement position as a starting point, for the remaining manipulators,we search along their pose-specific directions to find placement positions with minimal distancesfrom the first manipulator that do not result in collisions with soft bodies. Since the differentiablephysics solver is able to effectively adjust manipulator orientations during optimization, in practice,the candidate pose set does not need to be exhaustively large. In practice, we use three poses to coverleft-right, top-bottom, and front-back grasping poses.
Figure 5: Task illustrations of PlasticineLab-M with target and initial shapesRope++4.1	DatasetsTo extensively evaluate our method, we introduce PlasticineLab-M, a dataset that extends the existingdifferentiable physics benchmark PlasticineLab with seven new challenging multi-stage soft-bodymanipulation tasks, and contains the multi-stage environment Pinch in PlasticineLab.
Figure 6: Qualitative results of CPDeform and PlastiCineLab on multi-stage task environments.
Figure 7: Ablation Learning CurvesIn this section, we perform an ablation study to verify if transport priorities help find accuratesolutions efficiently. We compare CPDeform with random sampling contact points on the surface ofthe soft bodies, while maintaining all other settings and hyperparameters, including the number ofstages and candidate pose sets. Figure 7 shows the comparison of randomly sampled contact pointswith CPDeform. We observe that our method in CPDeform outperforms the surface-point samplingstrategy by a large margin in terms of both accuracy and efficiency, proving the effectiveness of thetransport-priority-based contact point discovery backbone employed by CPDeform.
Figure 8: Runtime of each method. We draw the wall-time in seconds on the x-axis and thecorresponding Wasserstein-1 distance loss values on the y-axis. Each data point represents the lowestloss achieved for that method at the end of a stage.
Figure 9: We demonstrate the visualizations of the transport priorities and the loss landscape usingWriter. For the loss landscape, the color of each pixel corresponds with the loss achieved by applyingthe differentiable physics solver near the corresponding simulator coordinate, where the height of themanipulator is set as a fixed value (illustrated in the current shape). Here, warmer colors indicatesmaller loss values and colder colors indicate larger loss values.
