Figure 1: Fine-grained vs. Coarse-grained. We compare two sets of 4 classes, each selected from(a) CUB (Wah et al., 2011) and (b) STL (Coates et al., 2011) datasets. The diagrams visualize imagefeatures extracted from ResNet-18 that was trained on each dataset via the method of SimCLR (Chenet al., 2020). The color of each dot corresponds to its ground-truth class. Both in the image-level andthe feature-level, the clusters in (a) are way more indistinguishable than those in (b).
Figure 2: Overview of C3-GAN. It synthesizes a background image Xbg and a foreground imageXfg from the background generator Gbg and the foreground generator Gfg respectively. To triggerthis decomposition, we perturb a foreground image with the random affine transformation matrix Tθright before the composition of two image components. The association between the latent code cand its image observation X is learnt by optimizing the information-theoretic regularization that isbased on the contrastive loss defined for their feature representations in the embedding space of thediscriminator. The inference of fine-grained class clustering is made based on the distances betweenimages, semantic features {hi(∙)}N=-1, that are depicted with dotted lines, and the set of clustercentroids {li()}iY=-01 which are the fixed number of embedded latent codes c.
Figure 3: Visualization of embedding spaces of MixNMatch, SCAN and C3-GAN that were trainedon CUB dataset. To this end, we reduced the semantic features of images sampled from 10 classesinto a 2-dimensional space through t-SNE. This result implies that only C3-GAN has learnt theembedding space where clusters are explicitly separable.
Figure 4: Qualitative analysis of the image generation performance. We present (a) images synthesizedwith the cluster indices of real images that were predicted by the discriminator, and (b) imagessynthesized by controlling values of the latent code c and the random noise z.
Figure 5: Images synthesized with the cluster index that corresponds to the class of real samples.
Figure 6: Examples of clustered images of CUB dataset. The cluster indices for the first and thesecond sets are the ones mapped from the real classes Cerulean Warbler and le Conte Sparrow viaHungarian Algorithm. Red boxes denote incorrectly assigned images.
Figure 7: Examples of clustered images of Flower dataset. The cluster indices for the first and thesecond sets are the ones mapped from the real classes 35 and 66 via Hungarian Algorithm. Red boxesdenote incorrectly assigned images.
