Figure 1: Overview of the equivariant Transformer architecture.
Figure 2: Comparison of testingMAE on the ANI-1 dataset in eV.
Figure 3: Depiction of bond probabilities and attention scores extracted from the ET model ofTorchMD-NET using QM9 (total energy U0), MD17 (average over 8 discussed molecules) and ANI-1 testing data. Attention scores are given as zi attending zj , bond probabilities follow the same idea,showing the conditional probability ofa bond between zi and zj, given zi. Darker colors correspondto larger values, element pairs without data are grayed out. See Appendix G for an overview ofelemental composition in the respective datasets.
Figure 4: Visualization of five molecules from the QM9 dataset with attention scores correspondingto models trained on ANI-1, MD17 (uracil) and QM9. Blue and red lines represent negative andpositive attention scores respectively.
Figure 5: Averaged attention weights extracted from the ET on the QM9 test set (molecules con-Sisting of H, C, and O only) with a displacement of 0.4A in single atoms. Blue bars show attentiontowards atoms in equilibrium locations, orange bars correspond to attention weights involving thedisplaced atom. Attention scores are normalized inside each molecule. The black bars show theattention weights’ standard deviation.
Figure 6:	Visualization of 10 largest attention weights by absolute value on random molecules fromQM9 (a), MD17-aspirin (b) and ANI-1 (c). Each column shows the same molecule, rows correspondto the same ET model trained on QM9, MD17-uracil and ANI-1 respectively.
Figure 7:	Distribution of elements in the datasets QM9, MD17 (combination of all target molecules)and ANI-1.
Figure 8:	Bond probabilities and attention scores extracted from the ET using testing data from allindividual molecules in the MD17 dataset. Attention scores are given as zi attending to zj , bondprobabilities follow the same principle, showing the conditional probability of a bond between ziand zj , given zi . The rightmost subfigure displays the total number of atoms for each type in thedata.
