Figure 1: The Slalom algorithms for verifiable and private DNN inference. The TEE outsources computationof n linear layers of a model F to the untrusted host server S . Each linear layer is defined by a matrix Wiof size mi × ni and followed by an activation σ. All operations are over a field F. The Freivalds(yi, xi, wi)subroutine performs k repetitions of Freivalds’ check (possibly using precomputed values as in Section 3.2). Thepseudorandom elements ri (we omit the PRNG for simplicity) and precomputed values ui are used only once.
Figure 2: Micro benchmarks on Intel SGX. We plot the relative speedup of verifying the result of a linearoperator compared to computing it entirely in the enclave. The dotted line shows the throughput obtained for adirect computation. “Fused” separable convolutions contain no intermediate activation.
Figure 3:	Verifiable and private inference with Intel SGX. We show results for VGG16, VGG16 without thefully connected layers, MobileNet, and a fused MobileNet variant with no intermediate activation for separableconvolutions. We compare the baseline of fully executing the DNN in the enclave (blue) to different secureoutsourcing schemes: integrity with Freivalds (red); integrity with Freivalds and precomputed secrets (yellow);privacy only (black); privacy and integrity (purple).
Figure 4:	Secure outsourcing of ResNet models with Intel SGX. We compare the baseline of fully executingthe DNN in the enclave (blue) to secure outsourcing with integrity (yellow) and privacy and integrity (purple).
Figure 5:	Micro benchmarks on an untrusted CPU. For three different linear operators, we plot the relativespeedup of verifying a result compared to computing it. The dotted line in each plot shows the throughputobtained for computing the operation.
Figure 6: Inference with integrity and/or privacy on an untrusted CPU. We compare the baseline inferencethroughput (blue) to that obtained with “on-the-fly” integrity checks (red); batched integrity checks (green);integrity checks with precomputed secrets (yellow); privacy only (black); and privacy and integrity (purple). Thefused MobileNet model has no intermediate activation for separable convolutions.
Figure 7: Multi-threaded micro benchmarks on anucts and convolutions using 4 threads.
