Figure 1: Illustration of Dynamic Programming based CTC and proposed W-CTC loss calculation.
Figure 2: WER / PER vs mask-ratio in ASR and PR tasks, on TIMIT test set.
Figure 3: Test accuracy on 7 standard test sets, as a function of r (mask ratio). The last plot is theaverage. The proposed W-CTC has generally better accuracy than the standard CTC.
Figure 4:	The alignment paths (in the trellis M) from CTC computation. Model A and C are trainedon corrupted labels r = 0.7; model B is trained on clean data r = 0. Model A and B use standardCTC; model C uses W-CTC. Model A fails to produce correct alignment. Model B has correctalignment but with confusions. Model C provides clear path though trained on corrupted labels.
Figure 5:	Ablation study on choices of σ{∙}. The 'max-prob' yields the worst performance in allthree experiments. The ‘weighted-sum’ is slightly better than ‘sum-prob’ in general.
Figure 6: The histogram of duration for TIMIT (for ASR and PR), and PHONEX14T (for CSLR)dataset.
Figure 7: Compare unnormalized loss with normalized version. No significant difference is ob-served.
Figure 8: The ASR experiment, When P(*|X) = P and Es P(s|X) = 1 - p. The plots areword-error-rate vs mask-ratio.
Figure 10: PR experiments. WER vs training steps.
Figure 9: ASR experiments. WER vs training steps.
Figure 11: The training loss comparison between the unnormalized version and the normalizedversion.
Figure 12: PER vs mask-ratio, on reduced phoneme set (39 phonemes) of TIMIT test set.
Figure 13: The PR experiment on 39 phonemes in TIMIT dataset, using the CRDNN model.
Figure 14:	Left: Standard CTC trained on mask-ratio r = 0.7; Middle: Standard CTC trainedon clean label; Right: W-CTC trained on r = 0.7. Here the standard CTC only make reasonableinference if it is trained on the clean label, where W-CTC generally output correct paths.
Figure 15:	Left, middle and right are the same as above. Here the standard CTC trained on cleanlabel, cannot even make correct paths when facing such corrupted label. W-CTC is not affected.
Figure 16:	Left, middle and right are the same as above. These are confusing examples. Forexample, the ”st” appears twice in ”mistrusting”, the ”oc” appears twice in ”streptococcal”. We cansee clean paths starting from the incorrect starting positions, in the W-CTC figures (right plots). Butthose incorrect paths end before reaching the end. Standard CTC cannot handle them at all.
