Figure 1: Histogram of the negative loss score (cf. Equation 1) before and after difficulty calibration.
Figure 2: Left: ROC (left) and precision-recall (right) curves of calibrated/uncalibrated loss scoreattacks on CIFAR10. The threshold τ that optimizes accuracy is shown as a red dot. Calibrationyields a higher TPR for the same value of FPR, or equivalently a higher precision at low levels ofrecall. The precision-recall trade-off surfaces very different behaviors for two methods that haveotherwise very similar accuracy.
Figure 3: AUC (left) and accuracy (right) of the gap attack and calibrated/uncalibrated loss scoreattacks against target model trained on varying training set sizes on CIFAR10. Both AUC andaccuracy increase as the training dataset size decreases due to more severe overfitting of the targetmodel. Difficulty calibration can effectively leverage this to improve the attack’s AUC and accuracyacross all training set sizes.
Figure 4: Accuracy (left) and precision-recall curve (right) of the loss score attack when changingthe member to non-member ratio. At low ratios, the calibrated attack can still identify members withhigh precision, whereas the uncalibrated attack is unable to do so despite high accuracy.
Figure 5: AUC (left) and attack accuracy (right) for the calibrated loss attack with varying numberof reference models on CIFAR-10. Using more reference models and training reference models witha higher shadow dataset size strictly improve performance at a cost of more computation.
Figure 6: ROC (left) and precision-recall (right) curves for calibrated/uncalibrated loss score attackon CIFAR10 against differentially private models. For large values of DP parameter , the calibratedattack can still successfully infer member samples with high precision at low recall.
Figure 7: Gap Attack vs. Calibrated Gap Attack score distributions. Target (Corr.) indicates that thepredicted class for the datapoint was correct using the target model. Calib (Incorr.) indicates thatthe predicted class was incorrectly predicted on the calibration model. Note that the two left-mostcategories in the calibrated plot correspond to a division of the left hand category in the original gapattack plot. The same relationship exists between the right-most categories. The left-most categoryin the calibrated gap attack shows the improvement in TPR that can be attained via calibration,resulting in the increased AUC seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8: The ROC curves for the gap attack and calibrated gap attack. Note that the area under theROC curve (AUC) is higher for the calibrated attack due to the increased TPR for low FPR.
Figure 9: Comparison of entropy and modified entropy with confidence and loss scores respectivelyfor CIFAR10 without data augmentation. Song & Mittal (2021) note that entropy is similar toconfidence. Modified entropy is similar to cross entropy loss.
