Figure 1: Unlike the ConvCNP (left) which makes independent predictions, the ConvGNP (right),introduced in this work, makes dependent predictions and can be used to draw function samples(blue) which are coherent. These are often necessary for downstream estimation tasks.
Figure 2: The ConvGNP model, introduced in this work, can recover intricate predictive covariances.
Figure 3: Samples drawn from the models’ predictive posteriors (green) compared to the groundtruth marginals (blue), using the kvv covariance.
Figure 4: Predictive log-likelihoods across datasets for the 1D Gaussian tasks. The oracle GP per-formance is shown in dashed black. The dashed red line marks the performance of the diagonal GPoracle, where the off-diagonal covariance terms are 0. Error bars too small to be seen in the plots.
Figure 5: Predictive log-likelihood performance of the models, across datasets for the 2D Gaussianexperiments, where the FullConvGNP is not applicable. Error bars too small to be seen in the plots.
Figure 6: The predator modelling task. Model fits (left) where black and red crosses show thecontext and target sets of a dataset, the blue regions show the marginals, and the green lines aresamples from the predictive. The dashed line marks y = 0. Error bars for per-datapoint predictivelog-likelihoods and threshold estimation task log-likelihoods too small to be seen in the plots.
Figure 7: Illustration of the failure mode of mean-field models in the threshold estimation task. Thecontext and target are shown in black and red crosses, and the black line shows the threshold for thiscontext set. In each plot, three samples from the predictive are shown in orange, green and blue.
Figure 8: Fit of the ConvGNP (kvv) on the EEG data. Each pane shows one of the three channelswith unobserved targets (red crosses). All other data (black crosses), including the remaining fourchannels are observed. Marginals are shown in green, and two samples are shown in blue and pink.
Figure 9: Illustration of sampled temperature fields. After training on low-res. simulations (top left)and observed data (bottom left), the models are conditioned on future low-res. simulations, to makepredictions. The remaining columns show the predicted mean and three samples from the predictive.
Figure 10: Scaling of the runtime cost and memory footprint of a CNN as a function of the convolu-tion dimension. See text for discussion. Error bars have been included for the runtime, but are toosmall to be seen in this plot.
Figure 11: Locations of the training (top) and test (bottom) target locations for experiment 1 (left),experiment 2 (centre) and experiment 3 (right).
Figure 12:Predicted μFigure 13: As for Figure 9, but for 24/02/2003.
Figure 13: As for Figure 9, but for 24/02/2003.
Figure 14: As for Figure 9, but for 06/03/2004.
Figure 15: As for Figure 9, but for 23/01/2006.
Figure 16: As for Figure 9, but for 04/04/2007.
