Figure 1: Benchmark data. Shown are samples from the Circle (left) and Helix (right) task.
Figure 2: (a) Visualization of the first layers of Circle representing g(x1 , x2) = x21 + x22. (c)Univariate deep neural network parametrization with outer weights a(ji) = ∆mj = mj - mj-1.
Figure 3:	Singleshot results. Performance of discovered tickets against target sparsities as meanand value ranges (minimum and maximum) across 25 runs. In order of appearance: Circle afterpruning (strong ticket), Circle, ReLU, and Helix after training (weak ticket). Results afterpruning look similar across tasks. Baseline ticket (leftmost sparsity) is given by black dashed line.
Figure 4:	Multishot results. Performance for Circle (top), ReLU (middle), and Helix (bottom)for 10 rounds of alternating pruning and training. We provide mean and obtained intervals (minimumand maximum) of accuracies of the final pruned network across 10 repetitions before (strong ticket,left) and after (weak ticket, right) final training. Baseline ticket accuracy is indicated in black.
Figure 5:	VGG16 CIFAR10 results. (Left) Performance for learned weak tickets. (Right) Perfor-mance of strong tickets discovered by edge-popup for VGG with planted baseline ticket of sparsity0.01. Baseline ticket performance is indicated by black line.
Figure 6: Visualization of lower bound. Bound on SLT existence probability Eq. (A.2) for l =0.005, ki = 2, L = 3, nl = 2, and nl,0 = 105. In each plot, one single variable is varied while theremaining ones are kept fixed.
Figure 7: Finetuning vs initialization. Performance for Circle (top), ReLU (middle), and Helix(bottom) for 10 rounds of alternating pruning and training. Visualized are weak ticket performances(i.e. training on initialized weights) against finetuned subnetworks (i.e. no reset of weights afterfinal pruning round). Baseline ticket performance in black.
Figure 8: RIGL. Performance for Circle (top), ReLU (middle), and Helix (bottom) for 60 roundsof training with default parameters. We report mean and minimum and maximum values across 10repetitions. Baseline ticket performance is indicated as black dashed line.
Figure 9: Singleshot results depth 3. Performance of discovered tickets for Circle, ReLU, andHelix against target sparsities as mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum) across 25runs. In order of appearance from top to bottom: Circle, ReLU, and Helix post pruning (left)and post training performance (right). Baseline tickets have sparsities of .16, .01, and .29, and theirperformance is given by black dashed line.
Figure 10: Singleshot results depth 5. Performance of discovered tickets for Circle, ReLU, andHelix against target sparsities as mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum) across 25runs. In order of appearance from top to bottom: Circle, ReLU, and Helix post pruning (left)and post training performance (right). Baseline ticket with leftmost sparsity and performance givenby black dashed line.
Figure 11: Singleshot results depth 10. Performance of discovered tickets for Circle, ReLU, andHelix against target sparsities as mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum) across 25runs. In order of appearance from top to bottom: Circle, ReLU, and Helix post pruning (left)and post training performance (right). Baseline ticket has leftmost sparsity and its performancegiven by black dashed line.
Figure 12: Singleshot results, depth 6 width 1000. Performance on test data are plotted for Circleagainst target sparsities. We report mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum) across10 repetitions of ticket performance right after pruning (left) and after training (right). The baselineticket performance is indicated by the black dashed line, leftmost sparsity correspond to plantedticket sparsity.
Figure 13:	Singleshot results for S YNFLOW with 100 pruning rounds. Performance on test data areplotted for Circle against target sparsities. We report mean and obtained intervals (minimum andmaximum) across 10 repetitions of ticket performance right after pruning (left) and after training(right). The original network is of depth 6 and width 100. The baseline ticket performance isindicated by the black dashed line, leftmost sparsity corresponds to planted ticket sparsity.
Figure 14:	Varying noise. Performance of methods for Circle with varying noise for 10 rounds ofalternating pruning and training. We report mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum)of accuracies of the final pruned network across 10 repetitions before (left) and after (right) the finaltraining. The noise level is indicated by line type. Baseline ticket accuracy is given in black.
Figure 15: Multishot with local pruning. Performance on test data are plotted for Circle againsttarget sparsities. We report mean and obtained intervals (minimum and maximum) across 10 repe-titions of performance after pruning (left) and after training (right). Baseline ticket performance isindicated by the black line, second to left sparsity correspond to planted ticket sparsity.
