Figure 1: Slot Attention for Video (SAVi) architecture overview. The SAVi Processor is recurrentlyapplied to a sequence of input video frames. SAVi maintains a set St = [st1, . . . , stK] of K latent slotrepresentations at each time step t. Slots can be conditionally initialized based on cues such as centerof mass coordinates of objects and subsequently learn to track and represent a particular object. SAViis trained to predict optical flow or to reconstruct input frames.
Figure 2: Frame samples from the multi-object video datasets used in our experiments. MOVi++ usesreal-world backgrounds and 3D scanned objects, which is a significant step up in visual complexitycompared to datasets used in prior work on unsupervised/weakly-supervised object-centric learning.
Figure 3: (a) Supervision ablations for a SAVi model trained with bounding boxes as conditionalinput. (b) Robustness analysis with Gaussian noise added to the conditioning signal. In both figures,we evaluate on the first six frames and report mean ± standard error across 5 seeds.
Figure 4: Representative qualitative results of SAVi conditioned on bounding box annotations inthe first video frame. We visualize predicted (Pred.) segmentations and optical flow predictionstogether with their respective ground-truth values (G.T.) for both MOVi (left) and MOVi++ (right).
Figure 5: (a) SAVi successfully handles examples with complex texture (left) and occlusion withobject of similar appearance (right). (b) In a heavily occluded example SAVi can lose track of objectsand swap object identities. (c) Unsupervised segmentation on CATER with RGB reconstruction.
Figure 6: (a) Per-frame segmentation quality. Grey area highlights the number of frames used duringtraining. (b) Video decomposition results on out-of-distribution evaluation splits with new objectsand/or new backgrounds (6 frames). Mean ± standard error for 5 seeds.
Figure 7: Emergent part-whole segmentation by querying the model at test time in different ways:The model attends to either both green fist with a single slot or to each individual fist with a separateslot, depending on the granularity of the conditioning signal. We visualize SAVi’s attention masks.
