Figure 1: Schematic of CCP model (left) and NCP model (right), where ◦ denotes the Hadamardproduct. Blue boxes correspond to learnable parameters. Green and red boxes denote input andoutput, respectively. Yellow boxes denote operations.
Figure 2: Adversarial attacks during testing on (a) Fashion-MNIST (top), (b) E-MNIST (bottom)with the x-axis is plotted in log-scale. Note that intermediate values of projection bounds yield thehighest accuracy. The patterns are consistent in both datasets and across adversarial attacks.
Figure 3: Adversarial attacks during testing on CIFAR-10.
Figure 4: Visualization of the difference between the bound results on Fashion-MNIST (top row) andon K-MNIST (bottom row). Specifically, in (a) and (C) We visualize the ratio Y =different log bound values for PN-4. In (b), (d) the exact values of the two bounds areQk=IkUi k∞k∙k=ιUi k∞computedforoverthe course of the unregularized training. Notice that there is a gap between the two bounds, howeverimportantly the two bounds are increasing at the same rate, while their ratio is close to 1.
Figure 5: Visualization of the ratiohidden rank = 166 5 4 3∙2λA Ol1.02	4	6	8	10	12	14Depth(b)Qk=I kUik∞k∙k=1Uik∞in a randomly initialized network (i.e., using normaldistribution random matrices). Specifically, in (a) we visualize the ratio for different log hidden rankvalues for PN-10. In (b) we visualize the ratio for different depth values for hidden rank = 16. Neitherof two plots contain any regularization.
Figure 6: Accuracy of PN-4 and PN-10 when the hidden rank varies (plotted in log-scale).
Figure 7: Ablation study on the effect of adversarial steps in Fashion-MNIST and K-MNIST. Allmethods are run by considering a projection bound of 1.
Figure 8: Accuracy of PN-4, PN-10 and PN-Conv under varying projection bounds (x-axis inlog-scale) learned on (a) Fashion-MNIST, (b) E-MNIST. Notice that the performance increases forintermediate values, while it deteriorates when the bound is very tight.
Figure 9: Samples from the datasets used for the numerical evidence. Below each image, the classname and the class number are denoted.
Figure 10:	Adversarial attacks during testing on (a) K-MNIST (top), (b) MNIST (middle), (c)E-MNIST-BY (bottom) with the x-axis is plotted in log-scale. Note that intermediate values ofprojection bounds yield the highest accuracy. The patterns are consistent in all datasets and acrossadversarial attacks.
Figure 11:	Adversarial attacks during testing on NSYNTH.
Figure 12:	Three new adversarial attacks during testing on (a) Fashion-MNIST (top), (b) E-MNIST(bottom ) with the x-axis is plotted in log-scale. Note that intermediate values of projection boundsyield the highest accuracy. The patterns are consistent in both datasets and across adversarial attacks.
Figure 13:	Three new adversarial attacks during testing on (a) K-MNIST (top), (b) MNIST (bottom)with the x-axis is plotted in log-scale. Note that intermediate values of projection bounds yield thehighest accuracy. The patterns are consistent in both datasets and across adversarial attacks.
Figure 14:	Experimental result of K-MNIST in NCP model.
