Figure 1: Comparison of thespeedup and the memory con-sumption of distributed multi-machine training and central-ized single machine trainingon the Reddit dataset.
Figure 2: Comparison of (a) thescore and (b) the average data communicatedper round (in bytes and log-scale) for two differ-ent distributed GNN training settings, includingParallel SGD with Periodic Averaging (PSGD-PA) where the cut-edges are ignored and onlythe model parameters are transferred and GlobalGraph Sampling (GGS), where the cut-edges areconsidered and the node features of the cut-edgesare transferred to the corresponding local ma-chine, on the Reddit dataset using 8 machines.
Figure 3: Comparison of notations VLpOcal(θ),十Lpocal(θ, ξp), and VLp1ll(θ) on two local machines,where the blue node and green circles represent nodes on different local machines.
Figure 4: Comparing LLCG against PSGD-PA and GGS on real-world datasets. We show the globalvalidation score in terms of the number of communications in (a,b,c,d), the training loss per round ofcommunications in (e,f ), and the global validation score per bytes of exchanged data in (g,h).
Figure 5: Effect of localepoch size (K)ArxiveO。S EIBA15Reddit----- w/ saπψling 20%,S=I----- w/ saπψling 5%, S=Iw/ saπψling 5%, S=20.0-,20	40	60Number of CommunicationseO。S EIBA15-----w/o sanψling ,S=1-----w/ saπψling 20%,S=I----- w/ saπψling 5%, S=Iw/ saπψling 5%, S=420	⅛	60Number of CommunicationsFigure 6: Effect of sampling on local machine and num-ber of correction steps on the server
Figure 6: Effect of sampling on local machine and num-ber of correction steps on the serverstep. It can be seen that PSGD-PA suffers from performance drop compared to other two methods,due to the residual error we discussed in Section 4, while both GGS and LLCG perform well andcan achieve the expected accuracy. Note that the performance drop of PSGD-PA can vary acrossdifferent datasets; in some cases such as Reddit, PSGD-PA can significantly hurt the accuracy,while on other datasets the gap is smaller. Nevertheless, LLCG can always close the gap betweenPSGD-PA and GGS with minimal overhead.
