Figure 1: The comparison between Domain-Switch Learning (DSL) and a domain-mix pipeline. (a)mixes up all the M domains in each training iteration. The deep model memorizes all the domain-specific knowledge (apart from the domain-general knowledge), which hinders cross-domain gen-eralization. (b) DSL includes only a single domain into a training iteration and switches to anotherdomain for the following iteration. Since the domain-specific knowledge does not fit other domains,the deep model is prone to discarding the domain-specific knowledge when switching to anotherdomain. We note that in our experiments, we use multiple relatively small datasets ( e.g. CUBWelinder et al. (2010), Cars Krause et al. (2013), Places Zhou et al. (2018), and Plantae Horn et al.
Figure 2: The overview of Domain-Switch Learning. DSL uses a single domain for a trainingiteration and switches to another domain for the following iteration. During the current iteration(the red area), DSL uses a domain-specific prompter and a domain-general teacher to assist thelearner. The prompter prevents the learner from over-fitting the domain-specific knowledge of thecurrent domain using a Re-weighted Cross-Entropy loss (Section 3.3). The teacher helps the learnerto memorize the domain-general knowledge shared among former domains using a novel BinaryKullback-Leibler divergence loss (Section 3.4).
Figure 3: Analysis on the predictions of prompter and teacher. "Di(*)" indicates that the currenttraining domain is Di. (a) The prompter fits Di better than the learner before the learner getsupdated on Di. (b) The teacher memorizes the general knowledge from all the domains and thusfits the former domains (e.g., D2,D3) better, while the learner fits better Di.
Figure 4: Analysis on Binary KLD loss and the number of switching round of teacher module.
Figure 5: Illustration of our proposed method on both shallow or deeper backbone settings.
Figure 6: Analysis on the hyper-parameter λ.
Figure 7: Analysis on the hyper-parameter α.
Figure 8: Analysis on the hyper-parameter μ.
