Figure 1: The geometry of the R-D lowerbound problem. For a given slope -λ,we seek to maximize the rate-axis in-tercept, E[- log g(X)], over all g ≥ 0functions admissible according to Eq. 6.
Figure 2: 2a top: R-D upper bound estimates on a randomly generated n =1000-dimensional Gaus-sian source; bottom: R-D lower bound estimates on standard Gaussians with increasing dimensions(the result of the BA algorithm for n = 2 is also shown for reference). 2b top: estimated R-D boundsand the R-D performance of Balle et al. (2021) on the particle physics dataset; bottom: the sameexperiment but on a 2D marginal distribution of the data, to compare with the BA algorithm. 2c:the same set of experiments as in 2b, repeated on the speech dataset. 2d top: histogram of the 2Dmarginal distribution of the physics data; bottom: example spectrogram computed on a speech clip.
Figure 3: Left: 128×128 GAN-generated images, with intrinsic dimension d = 4. Middle: Boundson R(D) of GAN images, for d = 2 (top) and d = 4 (bottom). Right: Quality-rate curves of ours andstate-of-the-art image compression methods on Kodak (1993), corresponding to R-D upper bounds.
Figure 4: R-axis intercept estimates at (negative) slope λ = 2 from our lower bound algorithm,trained with increasing n and k. The R-axis intercept of an optimally tight linear lower bound,Fn( n), increases linearly as a function of n; however, we see that the best achievable R-axis interceptachieved with a particular setting of k, 'k, plateaus out at logk as n increases.
Figure 5: Normalized histograms of the 2D marginals of the particle physics (5a) and speech (5b)datasets. The quantization bins and the associated empirical PMFs are also used define the discretized2D source distributions on which the BA algorithm is run.
Figure 6: Density plot of the 2Dbanana-shaped distribution fromBalle et al. (2021).
Figure 7: R-D sandwich boundsand the R-D performance of non-linear transform coding (Balleet al., 2021) on the banana-shaped source. For reference,the BA algorithm is also run on afine discretization of the source.
Figure 8: R-D sandwich boundson higher-dimension embed-dings of the banana-shapedsource. The tightness of ourbounds appear unaffected by theincreasing n.
Figure 9: Random samples of basenji from a BigGAN, d = 2.
Figure 10: Random samples of basenji from a BigGAN, d = 4.
Figure 11: Quality-rate curves on the Tecnick dataset.
Figure 12: Zoomed-in version of Figure 3-Middle-Bottom (GAN-generated images with in-trinsic dimension d = 4), showing the sam-ple mean estimates of R-D upper bound points(μD, μR bracketed by 95% confidence intervals(red), as well as lower bound estimates based onthe sample mean μξ (maroon, dashed) and its90% confidence lower bound (pink line, beneathmaroon).
