Figure 1: Example of an approximatedDelaunay graph GD = GD (R ∪ E)(solid edges) obtained from the Voronoicells (dashed gray lines) of the consid-ered R and E points as well as the dis-tilled Delaunay graph GDD containingthree connected components (solid darkcolored and gray edges) used in the finalevaluation of R and E. See Section 3for furher details.
Figure 2: Visualization of manifold approximations obtained by GS (a), IPR (b), GeomCA withoutsparsification (c), GeomCA with sparsification (d) and our proposed DCA (e).
Figure 3: Delaunay graph ap-proximation. In this exam-ple, five rays (green arrows)detect four Delaunay edges(solid gray). The angular sizeβij of the bottom right bound-ary is marked in red.
Figure 4: Box im-ages recorded fromthe front and rightvieWs, respectively.
Figure 5: Mean and std of DCA (P , R), GeomCA with and without sparsification(PsG , RsG , PG , RG), and IPR scores (PI , RI) obtained when varying the fraction p controllingthe amount of discarded R points. Vertical lines denote optimal values for P (blue) and R (orange).
Figure 6: Mode truncation results. Left: DCA P , GeomCA P sG andIPR P I precision scores (in blue colors), together with GS (green).
Figure 7: Examples of images generated by a StyleGAN that are closest (left) and furthest (right) totraining images from FFHQ dataset in representation space of a pretrained VGG16.
Figure 8: Examples of query im-ages (left) and their correspondingclosest R images (right).
Figure 9: Mean and standard de-viation of GS scores (multipliedby 100) obtained over 10 iterationswhen varying the fraction p con-trolling the amount of discarded Rpoints. Left: GS calculated on Rand E of equal size by downsam-pling E . Right: GS calculated onthe original R and E sets of un-equal size.
Figure 10: Scores obtained on R and Et when varying the truncation parameter t. Left: DCAP, GeomCA with sparsification PsG , and IPR PI precision scores (blue) together with GS scoremultiplied by 100 (green). Middle: DCA R, GeomCA with sparsification RsG, and IPR RI recallscores. Right: network consistency (green) and quality (purple) scores of DCA (c, q) and GeomCAwith sparsification (csG , qsG).
Figure 11: Examples of images contained in three non-trivial E components obtained in version 1(marked with blue) and in the single non-trivial E component obtained in version 2 (marked withgreen).
Figure 12: Additional examples of query images (odd columns) and their corresponding closest Rimages (even columns) taken from version 1 (left) and version 2 (right).
