Figure 1: a) Visualization of the standard DML pipelines and the aspects of intra-class alignmentand uniformity in the embedding space. b) Infographic of the fairness issue in DML, where learnedrepresentational bias can even transfer to downstream models building on previously learned repre-sentations. c) Layout of our proposed PARADE approach to better incorporate sensitive attributecontext and improve representational fairness.
Figure 2: A t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization of the two distinct PARADE embeddingsfor bird color CUB200 experiments: the sensitive attribute embedding (left) and the class labelembedding (right). In the sensitive attribute embedding, both example images are mapped to clusterswith birds of the same plumage (yellow and blue, respectively). Due to de-correlation, in the classlabel embedding, the images are separated from the region of space with other birds of the sameplumage, but are still well-clustered, indicating that PARADE can find other attributes to distinguishthese species clusters.
Figure 3: Impact of varying imbalance between the minoritized and majoritized classes on upstreamembedding and downstream classifier (RF) in the manually class imbalanced CARS196 experiments.
Figure 4: Class distribution in CARS196. Histograms visualizing the distribution over number ofsamples per class in the train (left) and test (right) datasets in CARS196.
Figure 5: Class distribution in CUB200. Histograms visualizing the distribution over number ofsamples per class in the train (left) and test (right) datasets in CUB200.
Figure 6: Class distribution in CelebA. Histograms visualizing the distribution over number ofsamples per class in the train (left) and test (right) datasets in CelebA.
Figure 7: Class distribution in LFW. Histograms visualizing the distribution over logarithm of numberof samples per class in the train (left) and test (right) datasets in LFW.
Figure 8: Impact of varying imbalance between the minoritized and majoritized classes on variousdownstream classifiers (RF, LR and SVM) in the manually class imbalanced CARS196 experiments.
Figure 9: Impact of varying imbalance between the minoritized and majoritized classes on variousdownstream classifiers (RF, LR and SVM) in the manually class imbalanced CUB200 experiments.
Figure 10: A t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization of the two distinct PARADE embeddingsfor Fitzpatrick Skintone CelebA experiments: the sensitive attribute embedding (left) and the classlabel embedding (right).
Figure 11:	A t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization of the two distinct PARADE embeddingsfor Race LFW experiments: the sensitive attribute embedding (left) and the class label embedding(right).
Figure 12:	Exploring fairness-utility tradeoffs in PARADE on CUB200 over grid of αSA and ρ values.
