Figure 1: 15 states in the east of the US as 15 do-mains. Left: Traditional DA treats each domainequally and enforces uniform alignment for alldomains, which is equivalent to enforcing a fullyconnected domain graph. Right: Our methodgeneralizes traditional DA to align domains ac-cording to any specific domain graph, e.g., a do-main graph describing adjacency among these 15states.
Figure 2: Difference between discriminators in traditional DA methods and the graph discriminatorin GRDA. Left: In traditional DA methods, the discriminator classifies the domain index given anencoding. Right: In GRDA, the graph discriminator reconstructs the domain graph given encodingsof data from different domains.
Figure 3: Global Optimum of GRDA v.s.
Figure 4: Example domain graphs as discussedin Sec. 4.2. Left: Cliques. Middle: Star graphs.
Figure 5: Possible encoding distributions of threedomains forming a chain graph of three nodes atequilibrium. We can see that for any encoding,e.g., eι,wehavep2(e1) = 1-(pι(ej+ p3(e1)).
Figure 6: Domain graphs for the two adaptation tasks on TPT-48, with black nodes indicating sourcedomains and white nodes indicating target domains. Left: Adaptation from the 24 states in the eastto the 24 states in the west. Right: Adaptation from the 24 states in the north to the 24 states in thesouth.
Figure 7: Detailed results on DG-15 with 15 domains. On the left is the domain graph for DG-15.
Figure 8: Visualization of the encodings of data produced on DG-15.
Figure 9: Visualization of the DG-15 (left) and DG-60 (right) datasets. We use ‘red’ and ‘blue’ toroughly indicate positive and negative data points inside a domain. The boundaries between ‘red’ halfcircles and ‘blue’ half circles show the direction of ground-truth decision boundaries in the datasets.
Figure 10: Visualization for data of four of the states in TPT-48. Here we show the states’ monthlyaverage temperature in Fahrenheit.
Figure 11: Detailed results on DG-60 with 60 domains. On the left is the domain graph for DG-60.
Figure 12: Detailed results on CompCars with 30 domains. On the left is the domain graph forCompCars. We use the domain in the dashed box as the source domain. On the right is the accuracyof various DA methods for each domain, where the spectrum from ‘red’ to ‘blue’ indicates accuracyfrom 65% to 30% (best viewed in color).
