Figure 1: The RAINDROP approach. Forsample Si, sensor u is recorded at time t1 asvalue xit,1u, triggering a propagation and trans-formation of neural messages along edges ofSi ’s sensor dependency graph.
Figure 2: Hierarchical structureof irregular multivariate time se-ries dataset. Raindrop embedsindividual observations consid-ering inter-sensor dependencies(Sec. 3.3), aggregates them intoa sensor embedding using tempo-ral attention (Sec. 3.4), and finallyintegrates sensor embeddings intoa sample embedding (Sec. 3.5).
Figure 3: (a) RAINDROP generates observation embedding hit,u based on observed value xit,u at t, passesmessage to neighbor sensors such as v, and generates hit,v through inter-sensor dependencies. The αit,uv denotesa time-specific attention weight, calculated based on time representation pit and weight vector rv . Edge weightei,uv is shared by all timestamps. (b) An illustration of generating sensor embedding. Apply the messagepassing in (a) to all timestamps and produce corresponding observation embeddings. We aggregate arbitrarynumber of observation embeddings into a fixed-length sensor embedding zi,v while paying distinctive attentionsto different observations. We independently apply the processing procedure to all sensors. (c) RAINDROPupdates edge weight ei(,lu) v based on the edge weight ei(,lu-v1) from previous layer and the learned inter-sensorattention weights in all time steps. We explicitly show layer index l as multiple layers are involved.
Figure 4: Learned structure for negative and positive samples (P19; Setting 1). The nodes numbered from 0 to33 denote 34 sensors used in P19 (sensor names are listed in Appendix A.15). To make the visualized structureseasier to understand, we use darker green to denote higher weight value and yellow to denote lower weight value.
Figure 5: Differential structure of dependency graphs between positive and negative samples. The edges aredirected. We select the top 50 edges with largest difference (in absolute value) between two patterns. The edgesare colored by the divergences. The darker color denotes the connection is more crucial to classification task.
