Figure 1: (a) The low-rank product of Bernoulli experts meta-model of conditional dropout posterior.
Figure 2: The 1D few-shot regression results of the models on GP dataset in fixed variance andlearned variance settings. The black (dash-line) represent the true unknown task function. Blackdots are a few context points (S = 5) given to the posteriors. The blue lines (and light blue area inlearned variance settings) are mean values (and variance) predicted from the sampled NNs.
Figure 4: The results from the 2D image completion tasks on CelebA, MNIST, and Omniglot dataset.
Figure 3: Active learning performanceon regression after up to 19 selected datapoints. NVDPs can use its uncertaintyestimation to quickly improve LLs, whileother models are learning slowly.
Figure 5: The additional 1D few-shot regression results of the models on GP dataset in fixed variancesettings. The black dotted lines represent the true unknown task functions. Black dots are a fewcontext points (S = 5) given to the posteriors. The blue lines are mean values predicted from thesampled NNs.
Figure 6: The additional1D few-shot regression results of the models on GP dataset in learnedvariance settings. The black (dash-line) represent the true unknown task function. Black dots area few context points (S = 5) given to the posteriors. The blue lines and light blue area are meanvalues and variance predicted from the sampled NNs, respectively.
Figure 7:	The additional results from the 2D image completion tasks on MNIST dataset. Given theobserved context points (10, 30, 100, half, and full pixels), the mean values of two independentlysampled functions from the models (i.e. NP, NP+CNP and NVDP (ours)) are presented.
Figure 8:	The additional results from the 2D image completion tasks on Omniglot dataset. Giventhe observed context points (10, 30,100, half, and full pixels), the mean values of two independentlysampled functions from the models (i.e. NP, NP+CNP and NVDP (ours)) are presented.
Figure 9:	The additional results from the 2D image completion tasks on CelebA dataset. Given theobserved context points (10, 30, 100, half, and full pixels), the mean values of two independentlysampled functions from the models (i.e. NP, NP+CNP and NVDP (ours)) are presented.
Figure 10:	The additional results from the 2D image completion tasks on CelebA dataset. Given theobserved context points (10, 30, 100, half, and full pixels), the mean values of two independentlysampled functions from the models (i.e. NP, NP+CNP and NVDP (ours)) are presented.
Figure 11: (a) sine, (b) cosine, (c) tanh function (left) with the probabilities of using parameters (1-Pt) (right) predicted with small NVDPs (13-12-12-2) conditioned on 4-shot context points (blackdots), and (d) the trigonometry dataset (left) and the deterministic shared NN parameters θ (right).
