Figure 1: Comparison of recursive Bayes, BOCD, BF, BAM and BAM with regularization oninferring a time-varying parameter. Results are computed over 20 random seeds. Solids lines are themedian and and error bars represent the 10% and 90% quantiles. Left: Temporal evolution of theposterior mean. Right: Temporal evolution of the log posterior variance.
Figure 2: We compare BAM to recursive Bayes in an episodic model learning for control settingwhere the agent knows when the cartpole dynamics have changed. For reference, the ground-truthscores (GT MPC) are also plotted for the different settings; all methods were averaged across 5random seeds with 10-90% quantiles shown. In this sequence, the values of gravity per episode are9.81, 11.15, 3.72, 11.15, 3.72, 9.81.
Figure 3: The bottom plot shows the gravity value changing over time; the performance of the learnedmodel in the swing-up task is shown above for 5 random seeds with 10-90% quantiles. Initially allmethods perform similarly until BAM encounters an environment it has experienced before, in whichit adapts more quickly than BOCD. The initial similarity is due to both methods detecting similarchangepoints and reverting to un-informed priors. Naive BAM performs well, albeit with weightoptimization after each trail versus only during detected changepoints for the other methods (60optimizations versus 〜5).
Figure 4: Cumulative regret over time between Thompson sampling (recursive Bayes), Bayesianexponential forgetting, BOCD, UCB, and UCBAM for different numbers of non-stationary arms,where results are averaged over 5 random arm configurations, where for each arm configurationresults were collected over 5 different random seeds. Shaded bars represent 25-75% quantiles.
Figure 5: For reference, the arm values of the bandit experiments without added noise (σ = 0.25),with only 2000 time steps for clarity. Each arm switches between a high and low value at variabletimes, such that the highest value arm may be a previously low value arm. The simplest strategywould be to find the highest mean value arm, which is what UCB does in this case. Recursive Bayesattempts the same, but does not explore sufficiently to achieve an accurate estimate of the mean armvalues.
