Figure 1: Depiction of the overall network with intervening distributions over the latent space, Zof these one-dimensional integrals can then be solved using any number of highly-accurate solvers(e.g., Runge-Kutta (Shampine, 2005), Dormand-Prince (Dormand & Prince, 1980), Tsit (Tsitouras,2011), etc.) that have error rates better than O(G-4) but are unavailable in high dimensions. The useof separable functions is a component of the VEGAS algorithm (Peter Lepage, 1978) and is utilizedin conjunction with adaptive Monte Carlo sampling to approximate high-dimensional integrals.
Figure 2: Separable func-tions need O(G) latent sam-ples (red) instead of O(GM)input samples (blue). Integra-tion regions emphasized.
Figure 3: Data and con-trastive distributions5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022different classes into one of two “buckets” per feature and enables classification through multiplefeatures. This results in an exponential number of components (with respect to dimension) in the fulllatent space, e.g., 2M components. However, we can easily offset this by choosing some dimensionsto use a unimodal latent distribution while the remaining dimensions are still bimodal:0	∫0∙5 N(-μ,σ2) + 0.5 N(μ,σ2), if m ≤ L	/[0pZm(zm) = N(0,σ22),	else	(10)In addition to the typical latent data distribution, pZ (z), we explicitly include a contrastive distribution,q(z). This distribution is critical if we desire to regularize our model outside the data distribution, i.e.,setting some background/default behavior. When using a bimodal data distribution, we additionallydesire that latent vectors are more likely under this distribution once the vector is sufficiently faraway from any single in-distribution mode. Therefore, we select this distribution so that it fullyencapsulates all the components of the data distribution, e.g., qm(zm) > pzm (Zm) for ∣∣Zm∣-μ∣ > γ.
Figure 4: Three-arm spirals resultsWe sample points in a dense 2-dimensional grid at twice the range of the data in both dimensionsand evaluate the probability that each point belongs to the two known classes and the OOD class.
Figure 5: Each subplot corresponds to a single latent feature. The top and middle rows contain theunnormalized logit components and distributions per class, with matching colors. The bottom rowcompares the distribution of Fashion MNIST (blue) and MNIST (red). x-axis shared across all rows.
