Figure 1: Information diagram of three variable system in PID. Each circle represents mutual infor-mation, and each area separated by them represents a decomposed term in PID. When we substitutea generative factor for u, a latent variable for v1 , and the other latent variables for v2 , the uniqueinformation U (u; v1 \v2) represents the information of the factor disentangled by the latent variable.
Figure 2: Information diagrams depicted by bands (the style borroWed from Figure 8.1 of MacKay(2003)). White boxes represent mutual information, Which We can compute. (a) The bands depict thedecomposition used in the PID-based disentanglement evaluation. (b) This diagram superposes thedecomposition for systems with (yk, z`, z∖') and (yk, z`, z`o) where z` is the latent variable chosenby MIG evaluation. The green boxes are positively evaluated in MIG (the top colored line) andUniBound (the bottom colored line), while the red boxes are negatively evaluated in them. Observethat MIG positively evaluates a part of the redundancy, namely R(yk; z`, z∖') - R(yk; z`,z`o) as itdoes not take into account the interactions among strict supersets of {z', z` }.
Figure 3:	Experimental results for VAEs trained with dSprites (top row) and 3dshapes (bottomrow). (a) Disentanglement scores. (b) Estimated PID terms. Three orange bars in each plot representthe possible values of unique (U), redundant (R), and complementary (C) information, respectively.
Figure 4:	Estimated PID terms of each factor in dSprites and 3dshapes. As in Figure 3b, threeorange bars in each plot show the range between lower and upper bound estimations of uniqueinformation (U), redundant information (R), and complementary information (C). See Figure 6 inAppendix for a larger version and Table 5 for qualitative interpretations.
Figure 5: Alternative diagram of Figure 1 in the band style following Figure 8.1 of MacKay (2003).
Figure 7: Metrics and PID estimations for varying regularization coefficients on dSprites. For eachmodel, the left panel shows how each metric reacts to changing the hyperparameter. The right panelshows the PID esitmations of resulting representations. In all plots, the horizontal axis correspondsto the regularization hyperparameter.
Figure 8:	Metrics and PID estimations for varying regularization coefficients on 3dshapes.
Figure 9:	Large versions of Fig.3. (Left) Results for DSPRITES. (Right) Results for 3DSHAPES.
Figure 10:	Disentanglement scores before aggregating across different training seeds for dSprites.
Figure 11: Disentanglement scores before aggregating across different training seeds for 3dshapes.
