Figure 1: Our proposed method allows for comparing different trajectory prediction models in termsof the extent to which they use social interactions for making predictions (left: none, middle: weak,right: strong). The target agent, whose future trajectory is to be predicted, is shown in red, andmodelled interactions are represented by arrows with width indicating interaction strength.
Figure 2: General framework of existing trajectory prediction methods: Given (a) a scene withdynamic agents, (b) the history of every agent is encoded as Fi, and (c) edges to other agents arelearned by an interaction encoder and aggregated to form the overall edge features Ei. Finally, (d)both the history and interaction features are passed to a decoder to predict the future trajectory.
Figure 3: The interaction encoder of Trajectron++ (a) and our Trajectron++Edge (b). Instead oflearning a single edge to all neighbors of the same type (i.e., to all pedestrians), we allow the modelto learn separate edges to existing neighbors and add dummy agents to handle the variable numberof neighbors (dashed circle). Here, red denotes the target agent and neighbors are colored accordingto their type (e.g., green for pedestrians, blue for vehicles).
Figure 4: Shapley values of Trajectron++ variants and PECNet on the three common benchmarksfor future trajectory (a-d) and the SportVU dataset (e,f). Notably, the contribution of social interac-tions (neighbors) is almost zero on the common benchmarks, while neighbors do play an importantrole when predicting the future trajectory on the SportVU dataset.
Figure 5: Qualitative analysis of our variant Trajectron++Edge for a scenario where the role ofinteraction is minimal (a) and a scenario where the role is important (b). For both scenarios, weshow the scene with players, the predicted distribution of the future after a fixed ∆t in blue (left),and the Shapley values of all players, the ball and the target’s past trajectory (right). In red is thetarget agent, the ball is in yellow, and the two teams’ other players are in blue/green. Solid lines arethe observed past trajectory and the dashed line is the ground truth future.
Figure 6: Comparison between the baseline Shapley values (used in our paper) and the marginalShapley values for our Trajectron++Edge on the SportVU dataset.
Figure 7: Histogram of the errors of the linear Kalman filter on the SportVU dataset. The fractionof challenging scenarios (i.e., with large kalman errors) are much larger than on the ETH-UCY, seeFigure 1 of (Makansi et al., 2021).
