Figure 1: Robustness certification for per-state action stability. We plot the cumulative histogram of thetolerable poisoning size K for all time steps. We provide the certification for different aggregation protocols(PARL, TPARL, DPARL) on three environments and #partitions u = 50. The results are averaged over 20 runswith the vertical bar on top denoting the standard deviation.
Figure 2: Robustness certification for cumulative reward. We plot the lower bound of cumulative rewardbound Jκ w.r.t. poisoning size K under three aggregation protocols (PARL, TPARL (W = 4), DPARL(Wmax = 5)) with two #partitions u, evaluated on three environments with different horizon lengths H .
Figure 3:	The convergence speed of the proposed partition-based training compared with the standardtraining. For our proposed training, we plot all training curves of the sampled 5 subpolicies in blue, whereeach subpolicy is trained on one partition of the dataset. (We do not plot all 50 curves for visual clarity). Forstandard training, we plot the training curve of the standard policy in red, where the single policy is trained onthe entire dataset. In Atari games, we train each policy (or subpolicy) for a fixed number of 50 epochs, whereeach epoch consumes 1M randomly sampled training data. In Highway environment, we train each policy (orsubpolicy) for a fixed number of 3000 epochs, where each epoch consumes 1K randomly sampled trainingdata. The offline RL algorithm used is DQN.
Figure 4:	Robustness certification for per-state action stability on Atari games (full results). We plot thecumulative histogram of the tolerable poisoning size K for all time steps in one trajectory. We provide resultson two games (Freeway and Breakout), two partition numbers (u = 30 and u = 50), and a comparison ofthree certification methods (PARL, TPARL, and DPARL). The results are averaged over 20 runs consideringthe randomness in the game environment, and the short vertical bar on top of each bar represents the standarddeviation.
Figure 5:	Robustness certification for per-state action stability on Highway environment (full results).
Figure 6: Robustness certification for cumulative reward (full results). We plot the lower bound of cumu-lative reward JK w.r.t. poisoning size K under three different certification methods (PARL, TPARL (W = 4),DPARL (Wmax = 5)) with two partition numbers (u ∈ {30, 50}). Each row corresponds to one RL algorithm,and each column corresponds to one setting of trajectory length H .
