Figure 1: (a) Cumulative face scale distribution on the WIDER FACE validation dataset (Easy ⊂Medium ⊂ Hard). When the long edge is fixed as 640 pixels, most of the easy faces are larger than32 × 32, and most of the medium faces are larger than 16 × 16. For the hard track, 78.93% facesare smaller than 32 × 32, 51.85% faces are smaller than 16 × 16, and 13.36% faces are smaller than8 × 8. (b) Performance-computation trade-off on the WIDER FACE validation hard set for differentface detectors. Flops and APs are reported by using the VGA resolution (640 × 480) during testing.
Figure 2: Computation redistribution among the backbone, neck and head. The backbone searchspace contains four stages, each stage having two parameters: the block number di and block widthwi. The neck search space only includes the channel number n. The head is shared for the three-scaleof feature maps (Ni), and the search space consists of the block number m and channel number h.
Figure 3: Computation redistribution on the backbone (stem, C2, C3, C4 and C5) with fixed neckand head under the constraint of 2.5 GFlops. For each component within the backbone, the range ofcomputation ratio in which the best models may fall is estimated by the empirical bootstrap.
Figure 4: Computation redistribution and architecture sketches under the constraint of 2.5 GFlops.
Figure 5: Computation redistribution and the searched network structures under different compu-tation constraints. Network diagram legends in the second row contain all information required toimplement the CRFD models that we have optimized the computation across stages and components.
Figure 6: (a) Precision-recall curves of TinaFace-ResNet50 on the WIDER FACE hard validationsubset, under different testing scales. (b) Computation distribution of TinaFace on backbone, neckand head with 640 × 480 as the testing scale.
Figure 7:	Ground-truth and positive anchor distribution within one epoch for the SCRFD-2.5GFtraining. The baseline method employs a scale augmentation based on the hand-crafted set [0.3, 1.0]and [0.3, 2.0], while our method uses a searched scale set for optimized scale augmentation. Thenumber of small faces (< 32 × 32) significantly increases after the automatic scale augmentationstrategy is used.
Figure 8:	Precision-recall curves on AFW, PASCAL, and FDDB datasets. The proposed SCRFD istested on the single-scale VGA resolution.
Figure 9: Qualitative results on AFW, PASCAL, FDDB and WIDER FACE datasets. The proposedSCRFD-2.5GF is tested on the VGA resolution. Yellow rectangles show the detection results andbrightness encodes the detection confidence.
