Figure 1: Comparison of the GW matching (left) and asymmetric SrGW matchings (middle and right)between graphs C and C with uniform distributions. Nodes of the source graph are colored based ontheir clusters. The OT from the source to the target nodes is represented by arcs colored dependingon the corresponding source node color. The nodes in the target graph are colored by averaging the(rgb) color of the source nodes, weighted by the entries of the OT plan.
Figure 2: GW vs srGW partitioning of G = (C, h = 1n/n) with 3 clusters of varying proportionsto G = (Iq, h) where h is fixed to uniform for GW (left) and estimated for for SrGW (right) forq = 3 and q = 4. Nodes of G are colored based on their cluster assignments while those of G areinterpolated based on linear interpolation of node colors of G linked to them through their OT (coloredline between nodes) if these links exist, otherwise default^nodes color is black. Node sizes of bothgraphs G and G depend on their respective masses h and h.
Figure 3: Completion performances for IMDB-B (left) and MUTAG (right) datasets, measured bymeans of accuracy for structures and Mean Squared Error for node features, respectively averagedover all imputed graphs.
Figure 4: Runtimes of srGW’s CG algo-rithm over increasing graph sizes.
Figure 5: Illustration of the embedding of different graphs from the IMDB dataset on the estimateddictionary C. Each row corresponds to one observed graph and We show its graph (left), its graphwith nodes colored corresponding to the OT plan (center left), the projected graph on the dictionarywith optimal weight h? and the full dictionary with uniform mass (right).
Figure 6: Evolution of the embedded graphsizes over the graph atom size validated in{10, 20, 30, 40, 50} for dictionaries learnedwith srGW and srGWg (with λ = 0.01).
Figure 7: Completion performances for IMDB-Bdataset, measured by means of accuracy for struc-tures averaged over all imputed graphs.
Figure 8: Completion performances for MUTAG dataset, measured by means of accuracy forstructures and Mean Squared Error for node features, respectively averaged over all imputed graphs.
