Figure 1:	Learning curves of our algorithm and baselines on six different MuJoCo environments. Solid curvesexpress the mean of five trials. Shaded regions correspond to standard deviation among five trials. Our methodhas better sample efficiency than the model-based baselines. The improvement of performance over previousalgorithms is large on complex environments, i.e., Ant and Humanoid.
Figure 2:	The left two figures show learning curves of models with and without gradient loss on two simpleenvironments. Data used to train each model is collected by a random policy. Solid curves express the mean ofgradient error of five trials. Dotted lines express the mean of prediction error during the training of the model.
Figure 3: Left: This figure indicates our method is not sensitive to the number of directional derivatives usedto construct the gradient loss. Middle: The performances of our method with different w, the coefficient in frontof the gradient loss. The weight is recommended to be smaller for a higher-dimensional environment. Right:Our method outperforms the variant (without gradient loss) which underpins the importance of considering thegradient error when training the model. And the higher performances than the variant (single model) that onlyuses one model highlight the strength of the two-model-based structure.
Figure 4: Our method performs better than baselines with a similar number of parameters which supports thatthe improvement is not actually from the additional parameters. Results for all six domains are shown in Figure7 in Appendix B.3.
Figure 5: The impact of adding the gradient loss and the importance of two-model-based learning.
Figure 6: Prediction error of the prediction model and the gradient model on validation during thetraining of the agent. Directly adding the gradient loss item to the model training loss may influencethe learning for prediction. This may be the reason why the performance of our variants (singlemodel) is not even as good as using the model without consideration of the gradient loss for someenvironments, such as Hopper, HalfCheetah, and Humanoid.
Figure 7: The higher performances than the variant with a similar number of parameters support thatthe improvement of our method is not actually from the additional capacity.
