Figure 1: Evaluation of DSC and SSDP with other methods. (row 1) Results on simulated data.
Figure 2: Computation time4 Graph Two-Sample TestingInspired by the remarkable performance of our graph distance (2) in clustering, we analyse its appli-cability in graph two-sample testing. Two-sample testing is usually studied in the large sample casem → ∞, and several nonparametric tests are known that could also be applied to graphs. However,it is also relevant to study the small sample setting in graphs, particularly m = 2, that is, whethertwo large graphs are statistically identical or not (Ghoshdastidar et al., 2020; Agterberg et al., 2020).
Figure 3: (left) L2 distance between the graphons W1, W2, W3 and W4. (other plots) Averagepower of the test (5) for a graph pair of sizes 100 and 200, sampled from every pair of graphons.
Figure 4: Heatmaps of graphons W1 , W2 , W3 and W4.
Figure 5: Validation of the bound for n0 . The plot shows the average error rate (percentage ofmisclustered graphs) of the proposed algorithms DSC and SSDP for different n = {50, 100, 500}.
Figure 6: Evaluation of DSC and SSDP with other methods. (row 1) Results on simulated data usingARI. (rows 2 and 3) Results on real data from Bioinformatics and Social Networks, respectively.
Figure 7: Evaluation of all algorithms except GNTK and NCGMM using average error rate andaverage ARI for large simulated data.
Figure 8: Computation time of algorithms on different sets of simulated data for four clusters casedemonstrating the scalability of each algorithm. Computation time is plotted in log scale.
Figure 9: Illustration of two-sample testing with the proposed distance vs log moments and MMDon varying n in graph pairs of size (n, 2n). The plots show the average power of the test T. Testbased on the proposed distance is consistent for sufficiently large graphs and efficient compared toother methods in distinguishing even closer graphons.
Figure 10: Illustration of two-sample testing with the proposed distance vs log moments and MMDon real datasets - Bioinformatics and Social Networks. The plots show the p-value of the test T .
