Figure 1: Task Design. Both tasks use three input channels. Two correspond to "left" (blue line)or "right" (red line), respectively. The third (green line) sends the go cue, signaling the start of adecision period. A: Evidence accumulation (abbreviated EA) tasks contain a 2.4s evidence period(gray box) and 0.3s decision period. During the evidence period, input events or "cues" occur at timesgenerated by a Poisson process in the left/right channels. In the decision period, a target bump reflectsthe channel with more events during the evidence period. B: Delayed decision (abbreviated DD)tasks contains a 0.5s delay period (mauve box) and a 0.5s evidence period. No events are presentedduring this period. C: Example implementations shown here. RNN outputs are compared to tasktarget functions and weights change according to the RNN’s learning update.
Figure 2: Curriculum Design. Each curriculum is presented in "courses", blocks of trials with thesame task parameters. The number of trials in a given course is determined by the performance ofthe network. A Evidence elongation curriculum. Cue period is elongated at 0.1s per course for bothDD and EA tasks (EA schematized here). B Delay elongation curriculum. Delay period is elongatedby 0.1s per course in DD tasks. C Discrepancy reduction curriculum. The minimum allowablediscrepancy is decreased by 1 for each new course, until all discrepancies are presented.
Figure 3: Learning Without Curricula: "Null curricula". A, B: Performance of BPR and BPTduring training with the null curriculum on the EA task. (left) Green loss curves are the mean loss onthe test set, whereas gray is the mean loss on the training batch. (middle) Sample network outputs onthe test set. Left trials and right trials are separated by upper and lower panels respectively. (right)Average training loss over 50 RNNs trained. C: Cumulative density of curriculum completion times(CCT) of 50 RNNs with BPR (blue) and BPT (orange) in the null curriculum. D: Cumulative densityof CCT with null curriculum on the DD task. All RNNs failed to pass the performance threshold.
Figure 4: Curriculum Learning Performance. A: Evidence Accumulation (EA) task performancewith BPR and BPT under all curricula. Each row shows a different curriculum and columns showBPT vs BPR learning rules. B: Delayed Decision (DD) task performance with BPR and BPT underall curricula. All heatmaps show average performance as a function of discrepancy and weight update.
Figure 5: Discriminating principles by learned state versus curriculum completion time. A:(left) Low dimensional state spaces of networks trained by BPR and BPT with a discrepancycurriculum on EA task. Principal component (PC) scores of each time during the test set shown on thelargest three PCs. Each point is colored by the discrepancy D(t), with blue being the most negativediscrepancy; red, the most positive. (right) Fit between tanh(D(t)) and PC1. B: Low dimensionalstate spaces on delay elongation curriculum on DD task. C: Column 1: Effective dimensionality ofBPR (blue) and BPT (orange) under each curriculum (row) for EA (filled bars) and DD tasks (openbars). Column 2: Correlation R between the first principal component and tanh(D(t)) for BPR(blue) and BPT (orange) under each curriculum. D: Comparison between curriculum completiontimes (CCT) for each task (open vs filled) and curriculum type (x axis). Significance asterisk indicatesZ > 2 or p < .05. E: 3D scatter plot of Mann Whitney "U" metrics. Each axis shows a differentcurriculum compared against the corresponding null curriculum. Each point is bootstrapped withthe number of samples corresponding to the transparency (from 2 to 50 samples). Blue circles arefrom RNNs learning with BPR; orange, from BPT. F: Prediction accuracy with bootstrapped data,averaged over 1000 instantiations.
