Figure 1: First four columns show a comparison of the reference orbits and the Hamiltonian neuralnetwork (HNN) orbits of three particles. The orbits of the different particles are displayed with dif-ferent colors. The rightmost figures show the energy comparison. The reference orbits are simulatedby the RKF45 solver with the ground truth Hamiltonian, and the energy is conserved. The energy ofthe HNN changes dramatically at the close interaction of two particles (see c, f), and eventually theHNN orbits diverge from the reference.
Figure 2: Workflow of SANN.
Figure 3: (a) Profile of the potential function for the billiard model; q = (qx , qy) ∈ R2 denotes theposition. Comparison of (b) relative energy error and (c) MSE for billiard model.
Figure 4: Comparison of billiard orbits simulated using the Hamiltonian learned by different meth-ods. We can see that SANN produces orbits that are almost identical to those of the reference. Weprovide more results in Appendix E and dynamic graphs on website.
Figure 5: The first two figures show the comparison of relative energy error and MSE with variedtime for the three-body problem. The last two figures show the comparison of performance with andwithout resampling.
Figure 6: The first three columns show the comparison of the reference orbits (solid curves) and theorbits learned by different method (dotted curves). • is the initial position, and I is the direction.
Figure 7: Comparison of SAI and SI with time. The color markers refer to the occurrence of thestiffness phenomena; the same color corresponds to the same time period. The trends of SAI and SIare consistent. We provide more results on Appendix E and dynamic graphs in website.
Figure 8: Performance comparison of different activation functions on the three-body problem andbilliard model.
Figure 9: The learned potential function of the billiard model.
Figure 10: Comparison of different methods in training loss, MSE, relative energy error for differentnumbers of training epochs.
Figure 11: (a) SAI-based classification for a trajectory translated by a fixed vector for 7 differentvalues of v (v = 0.1, 10, ∙ ∙ ∙ , 106). Stiff intervals are marked in yellow. (b) SAI-based classifica-tion for a trajectory translated by a uniform random vector V on [0, v] (v = 0.1, 10, ∙ ∙ ∙ , 106). (c)Comparison of SI, SAI of the original trajectory, and SAI of the translated trajectory.
Figure 12: (a) SAI-based classification for a trajectory translated by a fixed vector for 7 differentvalues of V (V = 0.1,10,…,106). Stiff intervals are marked in yellow. (b) SAI-based classifica-tion for a trajectory translated by a uniform random vector V on [0, v] (v = 0.1,10,… ,106). (C)Comparison of SI, SAI of the original trajectory, and SAI of the translated trajectory.
Figure 13: (Supplement to Fig. 4) Comparison of billiard orbits simulated using the Hamiltonianlearned by different methods.
Figure 14: (Supplement to Fig. 6) The first three columns show the comparison of the referenceorbits (solid curves) and the orbits learned by different method (dotted curves). • is the initialposition, and I is the direction.
Figure 15: (Supplement to Fig. 6) The first three columns show the comparison of the referenceorbits (solid curves) and the orbits learned by different methods (dotted curves). • is the initialposition, and I is the direction.
Figure 16: (Supplement to Fig. 7) Comparison of SAI and SI with time. The color markers refers tothe occurrence of the stiffness phenomena, and the same color corresponds to the same time period.
Figure 17: Comparison of MSE of the learned dynamical systems under noisy data with differentnoise levels.
Figure 18:	Comparison of relative energy error of the learned dynamical systems under noisy datawith different noise levels.
Figure 19:	The increasing order of the normalized SAIs over the three-body dataset of 1,000 trajec-tories. The shaded area represents the 95% confidence interval.
