Figure 1: CLS-ER employs a dual-memory learning mechanism whereby the episodic memorystores the samples and the semantic memories build short-term and long-term memories of thelearned representations of the working model. The two memories interact to enforce a consistencyloss on the working model which prevents rapid changes in the parameter space and enables thealignment of the decision boundary with semantic memories for effective knowledge consolidation.
Figure 2: Task-wise performance on S-CIFAR-10 test set with 500 buffer size. The models areevaluated at the end of each task (y-axis) to evaluate how the task performances (x-axis) are af-fected as training progress. The stable model retains information from earlier tasks while the plasticmodel quickly adapts to the recent task. Note that there is less forgetting in the semantic memoriescompared to the working model. For other buffer sizes and S-TinyImageNet see Figures S1 and S2.
Figure 3: Model characteristics analyses of different methods trained on S-CIFAR-10 with 500buffer size. The Left and middle figures show the training loss and accuracy under varying Gaussiannoise added to the weights of each layer of the model. CLS-ER is considerably less sensitive to per-turbations, suggesting convergence to flatter minima. The right figure shows the task probabilities.
Figure 4: Reliability plots for different methods on S-CIFAR-10 with 500 buffer size. CLS-ERresults in considerably better-calibrated models and hence more reliable predictions. For other buffersizes and S-TinyImageNet see Figures S5 and S6.
Figure S1: Test set task-wise performance for the individual models on S-CIFAR-10 with differentbuffer sizes. The task-wise performance (x-axis) is evaluated at the end of training of each task(y-axis) to evaluate how it is affected as training progresses.
Figure S2: Test set task-wise performance for the individual models on S-Tiny-ImageNet with dif-ferent buffer sizes. The task-wise performance (x-axis) is evaluated at the end of training of eachtask (y-axis) to evaluate how it is affected as training progresses.
Figure S3: Task probabilities for different methods on S-CIFAR-10 with varying memory budget.
Figure S4: Task probabilities for different methods on S-Tiny-ImageNet with varying memory bud-get.
Figure S5: Reliability plots for the different methods on S-CIFAR-10 with varying memory budget.
Figure S6: Reliability plots for the different methods on S-Tiny-ImageNet with varying memorybudget.
