Figure 1: Illustration of the DEGREE for decomposing GCN. Node features or latent embeddingscontain target portion (orange hemisphere) and an background portion (blue hemisphere). (a)-(c)show the workflow of the GCN, exhibiting only the messages aggregation for node A. (d) demon-strates message aggregation after decomposition. (e) demonstrates the decomposed message flow.
Figure 2: The subgraph agglomeration results on MUTAG dataset. The first row shows a correctprediction. The second and the third row report two typical examples of errors. Red is mutagenic,blue is non-mutagenic, gray is not selected. The colored edges link the selected nodes. The processgoes from left to right. The graph on the far left in each row displays the score for individual nodes.
Figure 3: The subgraph agglomeration results on the Graph-SST2 dataset. The first row shows anincorrect prediction, the second row shows the correct one. Red is negative, blue is positive.
Figure 4: The quantitative studies of efficiency for different datasets and models. For the syntheticdatasets, the horizontal coordinate represents the number of nodes in computation graph. For theMUTAG dataset, the horizontal coordinate represents the number of edges in computation graph.
Figure 5: The subgraph agglomeration results on the Graph-SST2 dataset with a GCN graph classi-fier. All instances all correctly predicted. Red is negative and blue is positive.
Figure 6: The subgraph agglomeration results on MUTAG dataset with GCN graph classifier. Allinstances are incorrectly predicted. Red is mutagenic, blue is non-mutagenic, gray is not selected.
Figure 7: Relationship between the time efficiency(s), graph size and q on the MUTAG dataset.
Figure 8: ACC ofDEGREE, GNN-LRP and SUbgraPhX on MUTAG and GraPh-SST2.
Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of DEGREE and SubgraphX. The first row shows the interpreta-tion generated by SubgraphX. The second row is generated by DEGREE. The red color indicatesmutagenicity.
Figure 10: Visualization of the forward-looking experiment. DEGREE can locate the special nodewith 100% accuracy.
