Figure 1:	The three considered datasets. Each subplot shows samples from the respective dataset.
Figure 2:	Generative quality for one output modality over a range of β values. Points denote the FIDaveraged over three seeds and bands show one standard deviation respectively. Due to numericalinstabilities, the MVAE could not be trained with larger β values.
Figure 3: Generative quality as a function of the number of modalities. The results show the FID ofthe same modality and therefore all values on the same scale. All models are trained with β = 1 onPolyMNIST and β = 0.3 on Translated-PolyMNIST. The results are averaged over three seeds andthe bands show one standard deviation respectively. For the unimodal VAE, which uses only a singlemodality, the average and standard deviation are plotted as a constant.
Figure 4: Generative coherence for the conditional generation across modalities. For PolyMNIST(Figures 4a and 4b), we plot the average leave-one-out coherence. Due to numerical instabilities, theMVAE could not be trained with larger β values. For CUB (Figure 4c), we show qualitative resultsfor the conditional generation of images given captions. Best viewed zoomed and in color.
Figure 5: PolyMNIST withfive “repeated” modalities.
Figure 6: Linear classification of latent representations. For each model, linear classifiers were trainedon the joint embeddings from 500 randomly sampled training examples. Points denote the averagedigit classification accuracy of the respective classifiers. The results are averaged over three seedsand the bands show one standard deviation respectively. Due to numerical instabilities, the MVAEcould not be trained with larger β values. For CUB, classification performance cannot be computed,because shared factors are not annotated.
Figure 7: Joint log-likelihoods over a range of β values. Each point denotes the estimated joint log-likelihood averaged over three different seeds and the bands show one standard deviation respectively.
Figure 8: FID for modalities X1 , . . . , X5. The top row shows all FIDs for PolyMNIST and thebottom row for Translated-PolyMNIST respectively. Points denote the FID averaged over three seedsand bands show one standard deviation respectively. Due to numerical instabilities, the MVAE couldnot be trained with larger β values.
Figure 9: Qualitative results for the unconditional generation using prior samples. For PolyMNIST(Subfigures (a) to (d)) and Translated-PolyMNIST (Subfigures (e) to (h)), we show 20 samples foreach modality. For CUB, we show 100 generated images (Subfigures (i) to (l)) and 100 generatedcaptions (Subfigures (m) to (p)) respectively. Best viewed zoomed and in color.
Figure 10: Qualitative results for the conditional generation across modalities. For PolyMNIST(Subfigures (a) to (c)) and Translated-PolyMNIST (Subfigures (d) to (f)), we show 10 conditionallygenerated samples of modality X1 given the sample from modality X2 that is shown in the first rowof the respective subfigure. For CUB, we show the generation of images given captions (Subfigures(g) to (i)), as well as the generation of captions given images (Subfigures (j) to (l)). Best viewedzoomed and in color.
Figure 11: Generative quality as a function of the number of modalities. In contrast to Figure 3, herewe “repeat” the same modality, to verify that the generative quality also declines when the modality-specific variation of all modalities is similar. All models are trained with β = 1 on PolyMNIST andβ = 0.3 on Translated-PolyMNIST. The results are averaged over three seeds and all modalities; thebands show one standard deviation respectively. For the unimodal VAE, which uses only a singlemodality, the average and standard deviation are plotted as a constant.
Figure 12: PolyMNIST β-ablation using the official implementation of the MMVAE. In particular,for both the MMVAE and the unimodal VAE, we use the DReG objective, importance sampling, aswell as a learned prior. Points denote the value of the respective metric averaged over three seeds andbands show one standard deviation respectively.
Figure 13: PolyMNIST β-ablation, comparing MVAE with and without additional ELBO sub-sampling. MVAE+ denotes the model with additional ELBO sub-sampling. Points denote the valueof the respective metric averaged over three seeds and bands show one standard deviation respectively.
