Figure 1: Shifty accepts training data, D, one ormore fairness specifications (each consisting of adefinition of unfair behavior, g, and a tolerance, δ),and a description of possible demographic shifts,Q. It first partitions D into Dc and Df, and usesDc to select a candidate model, θc . Then, it usesQ and Df to compute a (1-δ)-probability high-confidence upper bound (HCUB) on the value ofg(θc) after deployment, for each fairness definition.
Figure 2: Results using the UCI Adult Census dataset under known demographic shift. For theexperiments using disparate impact, RFLearn, Fairness Constraints, and Fairlearn all produce failurerates of 100% before and after deployment. In the experiments using demographic parity impact,RFLearn and Fairness Constraints both produce failure rates of 100% before and after deployment.
Figure 3: Results when enforcing fairness constraints using the UCI Adult Census dataset underunknown demographic shift. Note that for the experiments using disparate impact, RFLearn, FairnessConstraints, and Fairlearn all produce failure rates of 100% both before and after deployment.
Figure 4: Marginal distributions over the demographic attribute, T , for the UCI Adult Censusexperiments (left) and the UFRGS GPA experiments (right). In each table, the left column showsthe distribution of the demographic attribute during training, the middle column shows the deployedmarginal distribution used in our experiments for known demographic shift (Section 4.1), and theright column shows the bounds on the marginal distribution used in our experiments for unknowndemographic shift (Section 4.2).
Figure 5:	Additional results when enforcing fairness constraints under known demographic shiftusing the UCI Adult Census dataset.
Figure 6:	Results when enforcing fairness constraints under known demographic shift using theUFRGS GPA dataset.
Figure 7:	Additional results when enforcing fairness constraints under unknown demographic shiftusing the UCI Adult Census dataset.
Figure 8:	Results when enforcing fairness constraints under unknown demographic shift using theUFRGS GPA dataset.
