Figure 1: The lower test robustness indicates better attack performance. (a) Without defenses: GIAperforms consistently better than GMA; (b) With defenses: GIA without HAO performs consistentlyworse than GMA, while GIA with HAO performs the best; (c) Homophily indicates the tendency ofsimilar nodes connecting with each other (blue & green nodes). The malicious (red) nodes and edgesinjected by GIA without HAO will greatly break the homophily hence can be easily identified andpruned by homophily defenders. GIA with HAO is aware of preserving homophily that attacks thetargets by injecting unnoticeable (more similar) but still adversarial (dark green) nodes and edges,which will not be easily pruned hence effectively causing the damage.
Figure 2: Power and pitfalls of Graph Injection AttackWith Definition 3.1, we can quantitatively compare the threats of different adversaries.
Figure 3:	(a): Effects of HAO with different weights; (b) Averaged attack performance of variousattacks with or without HAO against both homophily defenders and other defense models.
Figure 4:	(a) Homophily changes after attacked by GIA without HAO (orange) and GIA with HAO(canny); (b), (c) Attack performance against GCN and EGuard with different node and edge budgets.
Figure 5: Training curve of GCN on Cora with random labelsWe conduct experiments with GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) on Cora (Yang et al., 2016). The ar-chitecture we select is a 2-Layer GCN with 16 hidden units, optimized using Adam (Kingma &Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 0.01 and a L2 weight decay of 5 × 10-4 for the first layer. Wetrain 1000 epochs and report the training accuracy and test accuracy according to the best validationaccuracy. We randomly sample certain percent of nodes from the whole graph and reset their labels.
Figure 6: Edge-Centric homophily distributionsA-SU① α76543210A-SU①α(a) Cora	(b) Computers	(c) ArxivFigure 7: Homophily distributions before attackE	Proofs and Discussions of TheoremsE.1 Proof for Theorem 1Theorem 1. Given moderate perturbation budgets 4GIA for GIA and 4GMA for GMA, that is,let 4GIA ≤ 4GMA	|V | ≤ |E |, for a fixed linearized GNN fθ trained on G, assume thatG has no isolated nodes, and both GIA and GMA adversaries follow the optimal strategy, then,∀4GMA > 0, ∃4GIA ≤ 4GMA, such that:Latk(fθ(GG0IA))-Latk(fθ(GG0MA)) ≤0,where GG0 IA and GG0 MA are the perturbed graphs generated by GIA and GMA, respectively.
Figure 7: Homophily distributions before attackE	Proofs and Discussions of TheoremsE.1 Proof for Theorem 1Theorem 1. Given moderate perturbation budgets 4GIA for GIA and 4GMA for GMA, that is,let 4GIA ≤ 4GMA	|V | ≤ |E |, for a fixed linearized GNN fθ trained on G, assume thatG has no isolated nodes, and both GIA and GMA adversaries follow the optimal strategy, then,∀4GMA > 0, ∃4GIA ≤ 4GMA, such that:Latk(fθ(GG0IA))-Latk(fθ(GG0MA)) ≤0,where GG0 IA and GG0 MA are the perturbed graphs generated by GIA and GMA, respectively.
Figure 8: Homophily distributions after attack(c) Arxivadversary can cause the same damage as GMA. The definition of the mapping mostly derives howthe injection matrix is generated. While for the generation of Xatk, note that all of the input fea-tures X is normalized to a specific range within [-fl, fr] where fl, fr ≥ 0, following previousworks (Zheng et al., 2021). Thus, for any features Xv ∈ DX, αXv ∈ DX when 0 ≤ α ≤ 1. Wewill use the statement multiple times during the derivation of Xatk.
