Figure 1: Diagram of referential game and the architecture of our agents.
Figure 2: Generalisation performance of languages from fixed context with varying complexity. Thex-axis indicates the source games, and y is the accuracy. Lines in different colours represent thegeneralisation performance on different target games. We plot only the means of the convergedperformance to keep the figure readable (sD values are provided in Table 3 in Appendix E.2), andremove ‘refer7500f’ from the x-axis since it is a mix of |C | “ 7, 500 and |C | “ 2, 500.
Figure 3: Generalisation performance gaps between languages from varying context and theircorresponding fixed-context twins on all target games. The x-axis indicates the types of sourcegames, and the y-axis indicates the distribution of difference between the generalisation performanceof ‘referx’ and ‘referxf’ on all target games (i.e. ‘referx’ - ‘referxf’). Each point represent thedifference on a specific kind of target game, and the boxes show the corresponding values of medians,25th-percentile, and 75-th percentile. “refer10000” is not plotted since it doesn’t have a fixed-contexttwin game.
Figure 4: Generalisation performance of language from different source games on all target games.
Figure 5: How number of message types change over training epochs with different loss functions.
Figure 6: Statistics about frequency of Top-10 most frequent message type and the average Hammingdistances between their meanings at the beginning and end of training on ‘refer1000’. The barsindicate the frequency and the Hamming distance, and the black lines indicate the corresponding SD.
Figure 7: Mutual information curves over training epochs in different types of games. The convergedvalues are provided in Table 2By observing the above equation, it is straightforward to see that the MI value is decided by the numberof message types, i.e. the degeneracy degree of one language. Therefore, if two emergent languageshave approximately the same number of messages types (as shown in Table 1 and degeneracydegree, the MI values for these two languages should also be the same. However, as we illustrate inSection C.1 that degree of degeneracy cannot determine the expressivity of emergent languages, wecan then deduce that MI cannot fully measure the expressivity of emergent languages.
Figure 8: Same to Figure 4, but with wider range for y-axis.
Figure 9: Generalisation performance of language from the same source game over different targetgames, where each line represents a source game. Since the plot would become not readable if weplot error bars here, we provide SD in Table 4 below. The x-axis indicates the type of target games,and the y-axis is the accuracy on target games. If a line lies above the other over all the target games,it means that the corresponding source language has a higher expressivity than the other. On the otherhand, if two lines intersect, e.g. ‘refer1000’ and ‘refer2500’ above, then the expressivity of theselanguages is incomparable.
Figure 10: Results of language transfer with larger channel capacity. Error bars indicate the standarddeviation of the mean values.
Figure 11: Results of language transfer with larger agent capacity. Error bars indicate the standarddeviation of the mean values.
Figure 12: Results of language transfer with larger channel and agent capacity. Error bars indicatethe standard deviation of the mean values.
