Figure 1: Overview of Spurious Sig-nals Considered.
Figure 2: Feature Attributions. Here we show 5different inputs, one for each bone age category,and the corresponding Gradient feature attributionmap. We refer to the Appendix for an equivalentvisualization for other feature attribution methodsconsidered. We test three additional feature attribu-tion methods: SmoothGrad, Integrated Gradients,and Guided BackProp.
Figure 3: Concept Importance Methods for a Normal (non-spurious) model. Here We ShoW theTCAV score for all clinical concepts as well as the spurious concepts for a normal model that wasconfirmed to not rely on the spurious signals.
Figure 4: Top-Detecting Spurious Tag. Here we show in A) Feature attributions for 5 differentinputs across the four feature attribution methods with a normal model but with spurious Tag inputs;B) Feature attributions on the same 5 inputs as in (A), but without spurious Tag inputs with a modelthat has learned a spurious alignment between Pre-Puberty and Tag; C) Feature attributions on thesame 5 inputs as in (A), but with the spurious Tag inputs with a model that has learned a spuriousalignment between Pre-Puberty and Tag. Middle-Detecting Spurious Stripe. Here we show in A)Feature attributions for 5 different inputs across the four feature attribution methods with a normalmodel but with spurious Stripes inputs; B) Feature attributions on the same 5 inputs as in (A), butwithout the spurious Stripe with a model that has learned a spurious alignment between Pre-Pubertyand Stripe; C) Feature attributions on the same 5 inputs as in (A), but with the spurious Stripe witha model that has learned a spurious alignment between Pre-Puberty and Stripe. Middle-DetectingSpurious Blur. The blur images are analogous to the Tag and Stripe settings. Please refer to theFigures 7, 8, 9 in the Appendix for SmoothGrad, Integrated Gradients, and Guided BackPropexamples.
Figure 5: Concept Results for Tag and Blur Models. TCAV scores for a model reliant on thespurious Tag and a model reliant on Blur.
