Figure 1: Examples of quasimetric spaces. The car drawing is borrowed from Sutton & Barto (2018).
Figure 2: Quasimetric learning on a 3-element space. Leftmost: Training set contains all pairs exceptfor (a, c). Arrow labels show quasimetric distances (rather than edge weights). A quasimetric dshould predict d(a, C) ∈ [28,30]. Right three: Different formulations are trained to fit training pairsdistances, and then predict on the test pair. Plots show distribution of the prediction over 100 runs.
Figure 3: Two training sets pose incompatible constraints ( ) for the test pair distance d(y, z).
Figure 4: Comparison of PQE and baselines on quasimetric learning in random directed graphs.
Figure 5: Offline Q-learning results.
Figure 6: Two training sets pose incompatible constraints ( ) for the test pair distance d(y, z).
Figure 7: Training unconstrained MLPs on the toy failure construction discussed in Sec. 4.2 (re-produced as Fig. 6). Two patterns in the construction have different constraints on distance of theheldout pair (y, z). Plots show mean and standard deviations over 5 runs. Left: All training concludewith small training error. Right: Trained MLPs predict identically for both patterns. Here standarddeviation is small compared to mean and thus not very visible.
Figure 8: Bivariate distributions from different stochastic processes. Left: In a continuous-valuedprocess (where (Nθ, Nθ0) has bounded density if θ 6= θ0), perturbing one θ → θ + leavesP [Nθ = Nθ+] = 0. Then one of PNθ ≤ Nθ+ and PNθ+ ≤ Nθ must be far away from1 (as they sum to 1), breaking differentiability at either P [Nθ ≤ Nθ] = 1 or P [Nθ+ ≤ Nθ+] = 1.
Figure 9:	The 3-element quasimetric space, and the training pairs.Training set contains all pairsexcept for (a, c). Arrows show quasimetric distances (rather than edge weights of some graph).
Figure 10:	Training different formulations to fit training pairs distances via MSE, and using them topredict on the test pair. Plots show distribution of the prediction over 100 runs. Standard deviationsof the training error are shown.
Figure 11: A dense graph. Individual plots on the right show standard deviations.
Figure 12: A sparse graph. Individual plots on the right show standard deviations.
Figure 13: A sparse graph with block structure. Individual plots on the right show standard deviations.
Figure 14: Ablation studies of PQE-LH and PQE-GG on three random graphs.
Figure 15: Grid-world offline Q-learning average planning success rates. Right shows the environ-ment.
Figure 16: Grid-world offline Q-learning full results. Individual plots on show standard deviations.
Figure 16: Grid-world offline Q-learning full results (cont.). Individual plots on show standarddeviations.
