Figure 1: A demonstration that in the nonlinear setting (both types of data padded with zeroes to embed inhigher ambient dimension, see Setup in Section 6) VAE training does not always recover a distribution withthe correct support. Left figure: A histogram of the norms of samples generated from the VAE restricted tothe dimensions which are not zero, which shows many of the points have norm less than 1. (The ground-truthdistribution would output only samples of norm 1.) The particular example here is Column 2 in Table 3. Rightfigure: Two-dimensional linear projection of data output by VAE generator trained on our sigmoid dataset.
Figure 2: VAE training on 6 datasets with different choices of dimensions for sigmoidal dataset (see Setupin Section 6). The x-axis represents every 5000 gradient updates during training. The left-most figure isthe manifold error (see Setup in Section 6), The middle and right figure confirms that the decoder varianceapproaches zero and the VAE loss is steadily decreasing during the finite training time.
Figure 3: VAE training on 5 datasets generated by appending zeros to uniformly random samples from a unitsphere to embed in a higher dimensional ambient space. The x-axis represents each iteration of every 5000gradient updates. The left-most figure is the manifold error ( see Setup in Section 6), The middle and rightfigure confirms that the decoder variance approaches zero and the VAE loss is steadily decreasing during thefinite training time.
Figure 4: A demonstration of how the data points generated by the model trained with clipped decoder varianceis distributed. Left figure: A histogram of the norms of samples generated from the VAE restricted to thedimensions which are not zero, which shows many of the points have norm less than 1. (The ground-truthdistribution would output only samples of norm 1.) The particular example here is Column 2 in Table 5. Thedata points that do not fall on the sphere tend to lie on both sides of it whereas the those generated withoutdecoder variance clipping tend to lie inside the sphere as in Figure 1. Right figure: Two-dimensional linearprojection of data output by VAE generator trained on our sigmoid dataset. The x-axis denotes〈a*, X：r)andthe y-axis is Xr+ι, the blue points are from the trained VAE and the orange points are from the ground truth.
Figure 5: VAE training on 6 datasets with different choices of dimensions for sigmoidal dataset (see Setupin Section 6). The x-axis represents every 5000 gradient updates during training. The left-most figure is themanifold error (see Setup in Section 6), The middle and right figure shows that as the decoder variance isbounded below, the VAE loss stops decreasing further.
Figure 6: VAE training on 5 datasets generated by appending zeros to uniformly random samples from a unitsphere to embed in a higher dimensional ambient space. The x-axis represents each iteration of every 5000gradient updates. The left-most figure is the manifold error ( see Setup in Section 6), The middle and rightfigure shows that as the decoder variance is bounded below, the VAE loss stops decreasing further.
