Figure 1: Illustration of demographic parity definition for binary and quaternary sensitive attributes,and generalized demographic parity for continuous sensitive attribute. Markers ■ ∙ * ♦ represent av-erage prediction among specific discrete sensitive attributes, Red dashed line - - and blue solid lineγ∖j represent prediction average among all data and that with specific sensitive attribute. TV(∙, ∙)represents weighted total variation distance.
Figure 2: Demographic parity estimation error analysis with respect to bandwidth and number ofsamples for Gaussian distribution and second synthetic distributions.
Figure 3: Mitigation performance on tabular dataset with kernel estimation and other baselines. (a)The tradeoff between Accuracy (classification) and GDP for Adult dataset; (b) The tradeoff betweenMAE (regression) and GDP for Crimes dataset.
Figure 4: Mitigation performance of GCN, GAT and SGC for Pokec-n and Pokec-z dataset.
Figure 5: Mitigation performance for compositional sensitive attributes.
Figure 6: Local prediction average and sensitive attribute probability density function estimationerror analysis with respect to the kernel bandwidth and number of samples for bivariate Gaussiandistribution and second synthetic distributions.
Figure 7: GDP estimation error for different mean parametersVariance ɑɪɪ	Variance Og	Variance σ⅛2Figure 8: GDP estimation error for different covariance parametersH	More Details on Real-World Experimental ResultsMany real-world data are organized as tabular, graph and temporal graph data. Various machinelearning models and training strategy are specifically developed for these data types (Chen &Guestrin, 2016; Han et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2019). Our experiments demon-strate that the proposed GDP and corresponding regularizer can be adopted for these data types.
Figure 8: GDP estimation error for different covariance parametersH	More Details on Real-World Experimental ResultsMany real-world data are organized as tabular, graph and temporal graph data. Various machinelearning models and training strategy are specifically developed for these data types (Chen &Guestrin, 2016; Han et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2019). Our experiments demon-strate that the proposed GDP and corresponding regularizer can be adopted for these data types.
Figure 9: Mitigation performance for temporal graph Harris dataset. (a) TGAT with map attention;(b) TGAT with product attention.
Figure 10:	Prediction performance and GDP training curve for Adult (top) and Crimes (bottom)datasets with different hyperparameters.
Figure 11:	Prediction performance and GDP training curve for Pokec-n (top) and Pokec-z (bottom)datasets with GAT model.
Figure 12:	Prediction performance and GDP training curve for Pokec-n (top) and Pokec-z (bottom)datasets with GCN model.
Figure 13:	Prediction performance and GDP training curve for TGAT with map (top) and product(bottom) attention mechanism with Harris data.
Figure 14:	Prediction performance and GDP training curve for Adult (top) and Crimes (bottom)datasets with compositional attributes.
