Figure 1: Illustration of proposed approach. Left: CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017). Middle: Relaxedcycle-consistent model (RCAL), where the cycle-consistency is enforced through task specific modelsin corresponding domain. Right: Augmented cycle-consistent model (ACAL). In addition to therelaxed model, the task specific model is also used to augment the discriminator of correspondingdomain to facilitate learning. In the diagrams x and L denote data and losses, respectively. We pointout that the ultimate goal of our approach is to use the mapped Source → Target samples (xS7→T) toaugment the limited data of the target domain (xT).
Figure 2: Comparison of adaptation robustness between CyCADA (Hoffman et al., 2018), CyCADAwith no `1 reconstruction loss (Relaxed), and ACAL algorithms for variable number of unsupervisedtarget samples. Note: No labeled sample is used.
Figure 3: Low-resource supervised Domain Adaptation on MNIST (M), USPS (U) and SVHN (S)datasets. FADA model refers to Motiian et al. (2017). n = 1 means 1 labeled example per class. Nounlabeled target sample is used.
Figure 4: Performance comparison of proposed ACAL algorithm on SVHN (S) and MNIST (M)with baselines using different numbers of labeled training sample (per class) in target domain for (a)S → M and (b) M → S adaptation. (Best viewed in color)Table 4: Visual domain adaptation results from SVHN to MNIST (Low resource). No adaptationdenotes model trained on the source domain (SVHN) and target model refers to model trained on thetarget domain (MNIST). Note: MNIST (Low resource) domain contains only 10 labeled sampelsper class (MNIST-(10)), the experiments was performed 4 times with different random sampling forMNIST.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of domain adaptation for experimental models. Each columnillustrates the mapping performed by each of the models from the original SVHN image (sourcedomain) to MNIST (target domain, 10 labeled samples per class in total). It can be seen that theaugmented cycle-consistent model is able to preserve most of the semantic information, while stillapproximately match the target distribution.
