Figure 1: We show examples of distribution mismatches induced by the previous interpolationschemes when using a uniform prior in two dimensions. Our matched interpolation avoids this with aminimal modification to the linear trajectory, traversing through the space such that all points alongthe path are distributed identically to the prior.
Figure 2: Distribution of the squared norm kyk2 of midpoints for two prior distributions in 100dimensions: (a) components uniform on [-1, 1] and (b) components Gaussian N(0, 1), for linearinterpolation, our proposed matched interpolation and the spherical interpolation proposed by White(2016). Both linear and spherical interpolation introduce a distribution mismatch, whereas ourproposed matched interpolation preserves the prior distribution for both priors.
Figure 3: We show the monotone transport maps for linear interpolation evaluated at t ∈{0.05, 0.25, 0.5}, to Uniform and Gaussian priors.
Figure 4: 2-point interpolation: Each example shows linear, SLERP and transport matched interpola-tion from top to bottom respectively. For LLD icon dataset (a) and LSUN (b), outputs are producedwith DCGAN using a uniform prior distribution, whereas the CelebA model (c) uses a Gaussian prior.
Figure 5: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained on LSUN(128 × 128) using a uniform prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP anddistribution matched interpolation.
Figure 6: Random walk for LLD, LSUN (64 x 64) and CelebA. The random walks consist ofa succession of steps in random directions, calculated for the same sequence of directions using(non-matched) vicinity sampling in the upper rows and our proposed matched vicinity sampling inthe lower rows.
Figure 7: We illustrate the difference between linear interpolation, our matched interpolation and thestochastic interpolation suggested by the area chair.
Figure 9: Vicinity sampling on LSUN dataset (128 × 128) with uniform prior. The sample in themiddle is perturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
Figure 8: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained on icondataset using a uniform prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP and distributionmatched interpolation.
Figure 10:	Vicinity sampling on LLD icon dataset with uniform prior. The sample in the middle isperturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
Figure 11:	Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on LLD icon dataset with uniform prior.
Figure 12: Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on LSUN (64 × 64) with uniform prior.
Figure 13: 4-point interpolation between 4 sampled points (corners) from DCGAN trained on CelebAwith Gaussian prior. The same interpolation is shown using linear, SLERP and distribution matchedinterpolation.
Figure 14: Midpoint sampling for linear, SLERP and uniform-matched interpolation when using thesame pairs of sample points on CelebA with Gaussian prior.
Figure 15: Vicinity sampling on CelebA dataset with Gaussian prior. The sample in the middle isperturbed in random directions producing the surrounding sample points.
