Figure 1: An example of data distributions produced by converged models in the toy experiment oncategorical distribution. We examined four possible combinations of likelihoods and priors. Lour ,Lbgan stand for the likelihoods of our ProbGAN model and BGAN model. Pour and Pbgan stand forthe priors. Only our model (Figure 1(d)) learns the target data distribution (Figure 1(e)).
Figure 2: Visualization of projected hit sets. Rows from top to bottom correspond to MGAN, BGAN,and ProbGAN-PSA trained with GAN-MM objective. See Figure 6 (in appendix) for results ofall models. In one row, projected hit sets for each mode are plotted in different panels, where thered boxes indicate real data regions U [-1, 1]2. Different colors indicate samples from differentgenerators.
Figure 3: Images generated by MGAN, BGAN and our model trained on CIFAR 10 with GAN-NSobjective. The tenth generator of MGAN (Figure 3(a)) and the first of BGAN (Figure 3(b)) collapsewhile generators of our method all work well. DCGAN (Figure 10 in the appendix) also presents’single generator collapse’ issue. Note that, mode collapse also happens when baseline models trainedwith other GAN objectives.
Figure 4: Images generated by ProbGAN trained on ImageNet (left) and STL-10 (middle, right).
Figure 5: The l1 distances between model generated data distribution and target data distribution ateach iteration step. Results of model A, B, C, D are denoted by different colors.
Figure 6: Visualization of the projected hit sets of all models trained with GAN-MM objective.
Figure 7: Visualization of the projected hit sets of different models trained with the WGAN objective.
Figure 8: Visualization of the projected hit sets of different models trained with the LSGAN objective.
Figure 9: Visualization of the projected hit sets of different models trained with the GAN-NSobjective. All the models succeed in fitting each mode of true distribution with one of their generator.
Figure 10: Images generated by DCGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-NS objective at epoch250. Redbox indicates the collapsed generator.
Figure 11: Images generated by ProbGAN-PSA model trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-NS objec-tive.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 12: Images generated by ProbGAN-PSA model trained on CIFAR-10 with LSGAN objec-tive.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 13: Images generated by ProbGAN-PSA model trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-MMobjective.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 14: Images generated by ProbGAN-PSA model trained on CIFAR-10 with WGAN objec-tive.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 15: Images generated by Bayesian GAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-NStive.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 16: Images generated by Bayesian GAN trained on CIFAR-10 with LSGAN objective.Imagesin different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 17: Images generated by Bayesian GAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-MM objec-tive.Images in different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 18: Images generated by Bayesian GAN trained on CIFAR-10 with WGAN objective.Imagesin different rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 19: Images generated by MGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-NS objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 20: Images generated by MGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with LSGAN objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 21: Images generated by MGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-MM objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 22: Images generated by MGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with WGAN objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 23: Images generated by DCGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-NS objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 24: Images generated by DCGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with LSGAN objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 25: Images generated by DCGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with GAN-MM objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
Figure 26: Images generated by DCGAN trained on CIFAR-10 with WGAN objective.Images indifferent rows are generated by different generators.
