Figure 1: Testing Out-of-Distribution. Log-likelihood (expressed in bits per dimension) calculatedfrom Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) on MNIST, FashionMNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10.
Figure 2: Histogram of Glow log-likelihoods for FashionMNIST vs MNIST (a), CIFAR-10 vs SVHN(b), CelebA vs SVHN (c), and ImageNet vs CIFAR-10 / CIFAR-100 / SVHN (d).
Figure 3: PixelCNN and VAE. Log-likelihoods calculated by PixelCNN (a, c) and VAE (b, d) onFashionMNIST vs MNIST (a, b) and CIFAR-10 vs SVHN (c, d). VAE models are the convolutionalcategorical variant described by Rosca et al. (2018).
Figure 4: Decomposing the Likelihood of NVP-Glow / CV-Glow Results. The histograms in (a) and (b)show NVP-Glow’s log-likelihood decomposed into contributions from the z-distribution and volumeelement, respectively, for CIFAR-10 vs SVHN. Subfigure (c) shows log-likelihood evaluations forconstant-volume (CV) Glow, again when trained on CIFAR-10 and tested on SVHN. Subfigure(d) reports NVP-Glow’s BPD over the course of training, showing that the phenomenon happensthroughout and could not be prevented by early stopping.
Figure 5: Empirical Distributions and Graying Effect. Note that pixels are converted from 0-255scale to 0-1 scale by diving by 256. See Figure 10 for results on datasets of 28 × 28 × 1 images.
Figure 6: Histogram of Glow log-likelihoods for MNIST vs FashionMNIST and SVHN vs CIFAR-10.
Figure 7: Limiting Bounds. We trained an RNVP transformation on two moons data sets—which isshown in (a) for 2 dimensions—of increasing dimensionality, tracking the empirical value of eachterm against the upper bounds. Subfigure (b) shows Glow with an exp parametrization for the scalesand (c) shows Glow with a sigmoid parametrization.
Figure 8:	Random and constant images. Log-likelihood (expressed in bits per dimension) of randomand constant inputs calculated from NVP-Glow for models trained on FashionMNIST (left) andCIFAR-10 (right).
Figure 9:	Ensemble of Glows. The plot above shows a histogram of log-likelihoods computed usingan ensemble of Glow models trained on CIFAR-10, tested on SVHN. Ensembles were not found tobe robust against this phenomenon.
Figure 10: Data statistics: Histogram of per-dimensional mean, computed as μd =焉 PnN=I Xnd,and per-dimensional variance, computed as σd2 =N-1 PN=I (Xnd - μd)2 . Note that pixels areconverted from 0-255 scale to 0-1 scale by diving by 256. See Figure 5a for results on datasets of32 × 32 × 3 images: SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, CelebA and ImageNet.
Figure 11:	Analysis of codes obtained using CV-GloW model. Histogram of means (left column)μd = N PN=I Znd, standard deviation (middle column) σd = NN-T Pn=1 (Znd - μd)I 2 andnormsnormalized by √D (right column) computed as √Zn∣ = J' Pd ZnId.
Figure 12:	Effect of graying on codes. Left (mean), middle (standard deviation) and norm (right).
Figure 13: Samples. Samples from CV-Glow models used for analysis.
