Figure 1: t-SNE plot (Left) of the hidden states of a RNN trained to recognize a regular languagespecified by a 6-state DFA (Right). Color denotes DFA state. The trained RNN has abstracted DFAstates 1(green) and 2(blue) (each independently model the pattern [4-6]*) into a single state.
Figure 2: An overview of the state comparison experimental setup.
Figure 3: a (Left): Average linear decoding accuracy as a function of M . 3b (Right): Averagedecoding accuracy showing no statistically significant difference between linear (green) and nonlinear(blue) decoders for all MDFAs tested.
Figure 4: 4a (Left) Average normalized Area under the curve (AUC) for all decoding accuracy vscoarseness plots (similar to Figure 8). 4b (Right): Average ratio of coarseness that must be createdrelative to M in the MDFA to achieve 90% testing accuracy.
Figure 5: 5a (Left): Average linear decoder testing accuracy as a function of coarseness (The numberof times α is applied), sorted by the number of nodes in the MDFA. 5b (Right): Average transitionalaccuracy vs. coarseness, sorted by the number of nodes in the MDFA while using a linear decoder.
Figure 6: 6a (Left): Average nonlinear testing accuracy as a function of coarseness, sorted by thenumber of nodes in the MDFA. 6b (Right): Average transitional accuracy vs coarseness, sorted bythe number of nodes in the MDFA while using a non-linear decoder.
Figure 7: 7a (Top): The MDFA of the S imple Emails language with a dendrogram representing thethe sequence of abstractions created while using a linear decoder. Showing the initial abstractions arethose of the same pattern [a-d]*. 7b (Bottom) The MDFA of the Dates language with a dendrogramrepresenting the the sequence of abstractions created while using a linear decoder. Showing the initialabstractions are those representing states that represent the same moment in time.
Figure 8: 8a (Left): Linear decoder accuracies as a function of coarseness for the Simple Emailslanguage in Figure 7a. 8b (Right): Linear decoder accuracies as a function of coarseness for theDates language corresponding to Figure 7b.
Figure 9: (Top): Typical regular expression and corresponding DFA generated by our framework.
Figure 10:	(Top): Typical regular expression and corresponding DFA generated by our framework.
Figure 11:	(Top): Typical regular expression and corresponding DFA generated by our framework.
Figure 12:	(Top): Typical regular expression and corresponding DFA generated by our framework.
Figure 13: (Top): Typical regular expression and corresponding DFA generated by our framework.
