Figure 1: Overview of Permutation-Optimisation module. In the ordering cost C , elements of X arecompared to each other (blue represents a negative value, red represents a positive value). Gradientsare applied to unnormalised permutations Pe(t), which are normalised to proper permutations P(t).
Figure 2: Outputs of F for different pairs of numbers as input. Red indicates that the number on theleft should be ordered after the number at the top, blue indicates the opposite. Evaluation intervalsare [0, 1] (left) and [0, 1000] (right).
Figure 3: Outputs of f for different pairs of numbers as input. Evaluation intervals are [0, 1] (left)and [0, 1000] (right).
Figure 4: Outputs of F1 (left half, row comparisons) and F2 (right half, column comparisons) forpairs of tiles from an image in MNIST. For F1, the tiles are sorted left-to-right if only F1 was used ascost. For F2, the tiles are sorted top-to-bottom if only F2 was used as cost. Blue indicates that the tileto the left of this entry should be ordered left of the tile at the top for F1, the tile on the left should beordered above the tile at the top for F2 . The opposite applies for red. The saturation of the colourindicates how strong this ordering is.
Figure 5: Sensitivity to positions within a tile for MNIST 2 × 2 (left), 3 × 3 (middle), and 4 × 4(right). The left plot of each pair shows F1, the right plot shows F2.
Figure 6: Sensitivity to positions within a tile of the comparisons for CIFAR10 2 × 2 (left), 3 × 3(middle), and 4 × 4 (right). The left plot of each pair shows F1, the right plot shows F2.
Figure 7: Gradient maps of pairs of tiles from MNIST for F1 (left half) and F2 (right half). Eachgroup of four consists of: tile 1, tile 2, gradient of F(t1, t2) with respect to tile 1, gradient of F(t2, t1)with respect to tile 2.
Figure 8: Gradient maps of pairs of tiles from CIFAR10 for F1 (left half) and F2 (right half). Eachgroup of four consists of: tile 1, tile 2, gradient of F(t1, t2) with respect to tile 1, gradient of F(t2, t1)with respect to tile 2.
Figure 9: Network architecture for number sorting. The MLP in F computes f and is shared acrosspairs of set elements. The PO block performs the optimisation with the given costs and permutes theinput set.
Figure 10: Network architecture for image mosaic tasks. The small CNN and the MLP in F is sharedacross set elements and pairs of set elements respectively. The PO block performs the optimisationwith the given row and column costs and permutes the input set. The ResNet-18 network at the end isonly present in the implicit permutation setting.
Figure 11: Network architecture for visual question answering task using BAN with 8 glimpses (2shown) as baseline. We add a shared PO-U module with an LSTM to process its output for eachglimpse. The outputs of the BAN attention and the LSTM are added into the hidden state of the BANnetwork.
Figure 12: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on MNIST 3 × 3 withexplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 13: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on CIFAR10 3 × 3 withexplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 14: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on ImageNet 3 × 3 withexplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 15: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on MNIST 3 × 3 withimplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 16: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on CIFAR10 3 × 3 withimplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 17: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on ImageNet 3 × 3 withimplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 18: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on CIFAR10 2 × 2 withimplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
Figure 19: Example reconstructions of PO-U as they are being optimised on ImageNet 2 × 2 withimplicit supervision. These examples have not been cherry-picked.
