Figure 1: (a) A toy block castle. (b) Our method’s build of the observed castle, using its learnedobject representations as a guide during planning.
Figure 2: We divide physical understanding tasks into three distinct paradigms. (a) The first ap-proach makes the fewest assumptions, posing prediction tasks as an instance of image-to-imagetranslation. (b) The second uses ground-truth labels of object properties to supervise a learningalgorithm that can map to the space of a traditional or learned physics engine. (c) O2P2, like (b),employs an object factorization and the functional structure of a physics engine, but like (a), doesnot assume access to supervision of object properties. Without object-level supervision, we mustjointly learn a perception function to map from images to objects, a physics engine to simulate acollection of objects, and a rendering engine to map a set of objects back to a single compositeimage prediction. In all three approaches, we highlight the key supervision in orange.
Figure 3: Given an observed segmented image I0 at t = 0, our model predicts a set of objectrepresentations O, simulates the objects with a learned physics engine to produce O = fphysics(O),and renders the resulting predictions I = frender(O), the scene’s appearance at a later time. We usethe convention (in all figures) that observations are outlined in green, other images rendered withthe ground-truth renderer are outlined in black, and images rendered with our learned renderer areoutlined in blue.
Figure 4: Qualitative results on building towers using planning. Given an image of the goal tower,we can use the learned object representations and predictive model in O2P2 for guiding a planner toplace blocks in the world and recreate the configuration. We compare with an ablation, an object-agnostic video prediction model, and two ‘oracles’ with access to the ground-truth simulator.
Figure 5: (a) Visualization of scored locations for dropping an object at each timestep. BecauseO2P2 simulates physics before selecting an action, it is able to plan a sequence of stable actions. (b)The selected block and drop position from the scored samples, outlined in white. (c) The predictionfrom our physics model of the result of running physics on the selected block.
Figure 6: Heatmaps showing sampled action scores for the initial action given a goal block tower.
Figure 7: O2P2 being used to plan for the alternate goals of (a) maximizing the height of a towerand (b) making an observed block stable by use of any other blocks.
Figure 8: Ten goal images alongside the result of the Sawyer’s executed action sequence usingO2P2 for planning. The seven action sequences counted as correct are outlined in solid black; thethree counted as incorrect are outlined in dashed lines. We refer the reader to Appendix B for moreevaluation examples and PeoPle.eecs.berkeley.edu/~janner/o2p2 for videos of the evaluation.
Figure 9: Extension of Figure 8, showing our planning results on a Sawyer arm with real imageinputs. The seven action sequences counted as correct are outlined in solid black; the three countedas incorrect are outlined in dashed lines.
Figure 10: All actions taken by our planning procedure for one of the goal configurations fromFigure 8.
