Figure 1: First row: The original 28 × 28 pixel image from the MNIST database, and the sameimage translated by (-2,1), rotated by an angle of 10°, and deformed w.r.t. an arbitrary smoothvector field T. The '∞-norm of the corresponding perturbation is shown under each deformedimage. The pixel values range from 0 (white) to 1 (black), so the deformed images all lie farfrom the original image in the '∞-norm. Second row: The vector fields corresponding to the abovedeformations and their T -norms (cf. equation (3)).
Figure 2: Sample deformations for the Inception-v3 model. The vector fields and perturbationshave been amplified for visualization. First row: An image from the ILSVRC2012 validation set,the output of ADef with a Gaussian filter of standard deviation 1, the corresponding vector fieldand perturbation. The rightmost image is a close-up of the vector field around the nose of the ape.
Figure 3: Targeted ADef against MNIST-A. First row: The original image and deformed imagesproduced by restricting ADef to the target labels 0 to 8. The '∞-norms of the corresponding PertUr-bations are shown under the deformed images. Second row: The vector fields corresponding to thedeformations and their T -norms.
Figure 4: Untargeted vs. targeted attack on the ResNet-101 model. An image from theILSVRC2012 validation set deformed to the labels of second highest (first row) and lowest (sec-ond row) probabilities (out of 1,000) for the original image. The vector fields and perturbations havebeen amplified for visualization.
Figure 5: The (normalized) distribution of ∣∣τ* ||丁 from the MNIST experiments. Deformations thatfall to the left of the vertical line at ε = 3 are considered successful. The networks in the first columnwere trained using the original MNIST data, and the networks in the second and third columns wereadversarially trained using ADef and PGD, respectively.
Figure 6: The (normalized) distribution of kτ* kT from the ImageNet experiments. Deformationsthat fall to the left of the vertical line at ε = 3 are considered successful.
Figure 7: The effects of increasing the smoothness parameter σ on adversarial deformations forInception-v3. First and fourth rows: A correctly classified image and deformed versions. Secondand fifth rows: The corresponding deforming vector fields and their T -norms. Third and sixthrows: The corresponding perturbations and their '∞ norms.
Figure 8: The effects of increasing the smoothness parameter σ on adversarial deformations forInception-v3. Note that according to the criterion ∣∣τ* ||丁 ≤ 3, the value σ = 8 yields an unsuccessfuldeformation of the recreational vehicle.
Figure 9: Adversarial deformations for MNIST-A. First and third rows: Original images from theMNIST test set. Second and fourth rows: The deformed images and the norms of the correspond-ing deforming vector fields.
Figure 10: Adversarial deformations for MNIST-B. Note that image 9 in row 3 is misclassified, andis then deformed to its correct label.
Figure 11: ADef attacks on the Inception-v3 model using the same configuration as in the experi-ments in section 3.
Figure 12: ADef attacks on the Inception-v3 model using the same configuration as in the experi-ments in section 3.
Figure 13: ADef attacks on the Inception-v3 model using the same configuration as in the experi-ments in section 3.
Figure 14: ADef attacks on the Inception-v3 model using the same configuration as in the experi-ments in section 3.
Figure 15: ADef attacks on the Inception-v3 model using the same configuration as in the experi-ments in section 3.
Figure 16: ADef attacks on the ResNet-101 model targeting the 50th most likely label.
Figure 17: ADef attacks on the ResNet-101 model targeting the 50th most likely label.
Figure 18: ADef attacks on the ResNet-101 model targeting the 50th most likely label.
Figure 19: ADef attacks on the ResNet-101 model targeting the 50th most likely label.
Figure 20: ADef attacks on the ResNet-101 model targeting the 50th most likely label.
