Figure 1: Evolution Through Mediation. (a) Association events (k=0) where the node or edge grows.
Figure 2: Dynamic Link Prediction Performance for (a-b) Social Evolution Dataset (c-d) GithubDataset. We report HITS@10 results and zoomed versions in Appendix E. Best viewed in pdf.
Figure 3: Time Prediction Performance (unit is hrs). Figure best viewed in Pdf or colored print.
Figure 4: tSNE for learned embeddings after training. Figure best viewed in color.
Figure 5: Localized Embedding Propagation: An event is observed between nodes u and v andk can be 0 or 1 i.e. It can either be a topological event or interaction event. The first term in Eq 4.
Figure 6: Temporal Point Process based Self-Attention: This figure illustrates the computation ofhsutruct for node u to pass to node v for the same event described before between nodes u and vat time t with any k. hsutruct is computed by aggregating information from neighbors (1,2,3) ofu. However, Nodes that are closely connected or has higher interactions tend to attend more toeach other compared to nodes that are not connected or nodes between which interactions is lesseven in presence of connection. Further, every node has a specific attention span for other nodeand therefore attention itself is a temporally evolving quantity. DyRep computes the temporallyevolving attention based on association and communication history between connected nodes. Theattention coefficient function (q’s) is parameterized by S which is computed using the intensity ofevents between connected nodes. Such attention mechanism allows the evolution of importance ofneighbors to a particular node (u in this case) which aligns with real-world phenomenon.
Figure 7: Computing S. Illustration of the update to S under two circumstances for events that involvenode u: (i) Interaction events between neighbors (ii) Topological Event between non-neighbors. Weonly illustrate one node but update will happen for both nodes in the event (e.g. for (u, v), rows ofboth nodes will be updated asymmetrically due to different neighborhood size. (a) shows the initialstate where u has 4 neighbors and hence background attention is uniform b = 0.25. (b) u has aninteraction event with node 5. Update only happens to Su5 and S5u based on intensity of the event.
Figure 8: Ablation Study on Github Datasetmore important while considering the influence of neighbors. Please note that this version istemporal analogous of GAT.
Figure 9: Use Case I. Top row: GraphSage Embeddings. Bottom Row: DyRep Embeddings.
Figure 10: Use Case II. Top row: GraphSage Embeddings. Bottom Row: DyRep Embeddings.
Figure 11: Use Case IV: DyRep Embeddings over time - From left to right and top to bottom. t arethe timepoints when test with that id ended. Hence, t = 1 means the time when test slot 1 finished.
Figure 12: Dynamic Link Prediction Performance: Top 2 rows show performance for Social Evo-lution Dataset. Bottom 2 rows show performance for Github Dataset. 1st and 3rd row showperformance for Communication Events while 2nd and 4th row show performance for AssociationEvents.
