Figure 1: Experimental setup and methods. A. The isometric wrist center-out task with its eighttargets, color coded. BMI schematics: recorded neural activity predicts muscle activity. B. The BMIconsists of two networks: a neural AE and an EMG predictor. Recorded neural activity is binned andsmoothed to provide an input to the AE. The activity of the low-dimensional latent space providesan input to the predictor of muscle activity. C. The ADAN architecture that aligns the firing rates ofday-k to those of day-0, when the BMI was built.
Figure 2: Neural to muscle BMI. A. Example firing rates recorded from the hand area of primarymotor cortex while the monkey performed the isometric wrist task; we also show latent variablesand reconstructed firing rates. The quality of EMG predictions is illustrated by comparison to ac-tual EMGs for two representative muscles, for each of the eight target directions. B. Performancecomparison between EMG predictions from n-dimensional firing rates (blue) and EMG predictionsfrom l-dimensional latent variables, obtained either by training the predictor sequentially (green) orsimultaneously (red) with the neural AE. Error bars represent standard deviation of the mean.
Figure 3: Domain adaptation. A. 2D t-SNE visualization of the averaged 10D latent neural trajec-tories as the monkey performed the isometric wrist task for day-0, day-16 before alignment, andday-16 after alignment with CCA. B. Probability distribution of the 10D latent variables along arandomly chosen, representative direction. We show the distribution at day-0, and the distribution atday-16 before and after alignment using KLDM. C. Probability distribution of the L1 norm of thevector residuals of the reconstructed firing rates for day-0 and day-16, before and after adversarialalignment using ADAN. D. 2D t-SNE visualization of the vector residuals of the reconstructed firingrates for day-0 and day-16, before and after adversarial alignment using ADAN. E. Same as B, butfor alignment using ADAN.
Figure 4: A. EMG prediction performance using a fixed BMI decoder. Blue symbols represent thesustained performance of interfaces retrained on a daily basis. Red symbols illustrate the deterio-ration in performance of a fixed interface without domain adaptation. The performance of a fixedinterface after domain adaptation is shown for CCA (green), KLDM (orange), and ADAN (purple).
Figure S1:	Variational autoencoder. A. EMG prediction performance using a different BMI, basedon a VAE decoder, in comparison to the performance of a BMI based on the traditional autoencoder.
Figure S2:	Visualization of the probability distribution of latent variables in 2D using t-SNE. A.
