Figure 1: a) Percentage of goals successfully achieved on Seaquest and Montezuma’s Revenge.
Figure 2: Average achieved frames for point mass (task easy), reacher (task hard),manipulator (task bring ball), pendulum (task swingup), finger (task spin) andball in cup (task catch) environments. The goal is shown in the top row and the achievedframe is shown in the bottom row.
Figure 4: Per-dimension quantitative evaluation of goal achievement on continuous control domainsusing the “uniform” goal substitution scheme (Appendix A3). Each subplot corresponds to a domain,with each group of colored rows representing a method. Each individual row represents a dimensionof the controllable state (such as ajoint angle). The color of each cell indicates the fraction of goalstates for which the method was able to match the ground truth value for that dimension to within10% of the possible range. The position along the x-axis indicates the point in training in millions offrames. For example, on the reacher domain DISCERN learns to match both dimensions of thecontrollable state, but on the cartpole domain it learns to match the first dimension (cart position)but not the second dimension (pole angle).
Figure 3: Quantitative evaluation of goal achievement on continuous control domains using the“uniform” goal substitution scheme (see Appendix A3). For each method, we show the fraction ofgoals achieved over a fixed goal set (100 images per domain).
Figure 5: Average achieved frames over 30 trials from a random initialization on therooms_watermaze task. Goals are shown in the top row while the corresponding average achievedframes are in the bottom row.
Figure 6: Results for Control Suite tasks using the “diverse” goal substitution scheme.
Figure 7: Average goal achievement on cartpole. Top row shows the goals. Middle row showsachievement by the Autoencoder baseline. Bottom row shows average goal achievement by DISCERN.
Figure 8: Per-dimension quantitative evaluation on the manipulator domain. See Figure 4 fora description of the visualization. DISCERN learns to reliably control more dimensions of theunderlying state than any of the baselines.
