Figure 1: Unlike point embeddings, stochastic embeddings may hedge their bets across the space.
Figure 2: Computational graph for computing p(m|x1, x2) using HIB with Gaussian embeddings.
Figure 3: 2D Gaussian embeddings from 2-digit MNIST. Corrupted test images (right) generallyhave embeddings that spread density across larger regions of the space than clean images (left). SeeAppendix Figure 8 for a 3D version.
Figure 4: Point vs. hedged image embeddings. Square markers indicate the class centroids ofembeddings for 2-digit MNIST. Left: Centroids learned with point embeddings. Occluded exam-ples map into the embedding space with no special indication of corruption or confidence. Right:Hedged embeddings comprising a single Gaussian (rendered as 3σ ellipses). A clean input such asthe “03” is embedded into a tight Gaussian, while a corrupted image such as the “52” occupies anelongated ellipse that places bets that the least significant digit is a “2” but the most significant digitcould be any of a number of choices.
Figure 5: Correlations between the uncertainty measure η(x) and AP and KNN accuracy on the testset for the N = 3, D = 3 case using single Gaussian embeddings. Uncertainty increases along thehorizontal axis. We observe that accuracy generally decreases as uncertainty increases.
Figure 6: Soft contrastive versus vanilla contrastive loss for point embeddings.
Figure 7: MoG embeddings of 2-digit numbers. Components corresponding to common input arejoined with a thin line. It is qualitatively apparent that corrupted examples (right) tend to have moredispersed components than clean ones (left) as a result of the “bet hedging” behavior.
Figure 8: 3D embeddings of 3-digit MNIST. Corrupted test images (right) generally have embed-dings that spread density across larger regions of the space than those of clean images (left).
Figure 9: Correlation between the uncertainty measure η(x) and balanced accuracy on the pet testset for 20D single Gaussian embeddings. Uncertainty increases along the horizontal axis. (b) and(c) show match score distributions of pairs of the same and different pets for lowest and highestuncertainty bins. There is clearly more confusion for the highly uncertain samples.
Figure 10: Uncertain embeddings self-organize. Class centroids for 2D point embeddings of 2-digitMNIST are shown, colored here by ones digit (left) and tens digit (right). The hedged instanceembeddings have a structure where the classes self-organize in an axis aligned manner because ofthe diagonal covariance matrix used in the model.
Figure 11: Embedding 2-digit MNIST onto the number line. Top: An ordering of class centroidsproduced with hedged instance embedding with Gaussian embeddings. Bottom: An ordering pro-duced with point embedding. Centroids are colored according to least significant (ones) digit. Thehedged instance embedding more often places classes that share attributes (in this case, a ones digitor tens digit).
Figure 12: Impact of the weight on KL divergence. Each plot shows ellipsoids corresponding tohedged embeddings of corrupted test images from models mapping 3-digit MNIST to 3 dimensions.
