Figure 1: Comparison of related variants of VAE models. Note that user variables are not includedin the graphs for clarity. (a) VAE; (b) CVAE-CF with auxiliary variables; (c) Joint VariationalAuto-Encoder-Collaborative Filtering (JVAE-CF); (d) JMVAE; and, (e) List-CVAE (ours) with thewhole slate as input.
Figure 2: Structure of List-CVAE for both (a) training and (b) inference. S = (d1, d2, . . . , dk) is theinput slate. c = Φ(r) is the conditioning vector, where r = (r1, r2, . . . , rk) is the user responses onthe slate S. The concatenation of S and c makes the input vector to the encoder. The latent variableZ ∈ Rm has a learned prior distribution N(μo, σ0). The raw output from the decoder are k vectorsx1, x2 . . . , xk, each of which is mapped to a real document through taking the dot product with thematrix Φ containing all document embeddings. Thus produced k vectors of logits are then passed tothe negatively downsampled k-head softmax operation. At inference time, c? is the ideal conditionwhose concatenation with sampled Z is the input to the decoder.
Figure 3: Predictive prior distribution of the latent variable z in R2, conditioned on ideal user responsec? = (1, 1, . . . , 1). The color map corresponds to the expected total responses of the correspondingslates. Plots are generated from the simulation experiment with 1000 documents and slate size 10.
Figure 4: Small-scale experiments. The shaded area represent the 95% confidence interval over 20independent runs. We compare List-CVAE against all baselines on small-scale synthetic data.
Figure 5: Real data experiments: (a) Distribution of user responses in the filtered RecSys 2015YOOCHOOSE Challenge dataset; (b) We compare List-CVAE against all greedy and auto-regressiveranking baselines as well as the Random baseline on a semi-synthetic dataset of 10,000 documents.
Figure 6: Generalization test on List-CVAE. All training examples have total responses Pi5=1 ri ≤ 5hfor h = 80%, 60%, 40%, 20%. Any slates with higher total responses are eliminated from the trainingdata. The other experiment setups are the same as in the Medium-scale experiment.
Figure 7: Personalization test with |U| = 50, n = 100, k = 10. The shaded area represent the 95%confidence interval over 20 independent runs. We compare List-CVAE against Greedy MLP, PositionMLP, Pairwise MLP, Greedy LSTM and Random baselines on small-scale synthetic data.
