Figure 1: Observing human moving, humans are able to perceive disentangled object parts, understandtheir hierarchical structure, and capture their corresponding motion fields (without any annotations).
Figure 2: Knowing that the legs are part of human body, the legs' motion can be decomposed as thesum of the body,s motion and the legs, local motion.
Figure 3: Our PSD model has seven components: (a) motion encoder; (b) kernel decoder; (C) imageencoder; (d) cross convolution; (e) motion decoder; (f) structural descriptor; and (g) image decoder.
Figure 5: Results of segmenting different shapes (b) and learning hierarchical tree structure (C) on adataset with more shapes.
Figure 6: Results of synthesizing future frames (a-e) and learning hierarchical structure (f) on digits.
Figure 7: Qualitative results of object segmentation on shapes and digits: (a) Ground-truth; (b) PSD;(C) NEM; and (d) R-NEM.In this visualization, we superimpose the segmentation masks on images.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of object segmentation when generalizing to new dataset.
Figure 9: Results of segmenting objects (d-f) and learning hierarchical structure (g) on Atari games.
Figure 10: Qualitative results of synthesizing future frames on real-world human motions (exercise).
Figure 11: Qualitative results of synthesizing future frames on real-world human motions (yoga).
Figure 12: Comparison of synthesizing future frames between our PSD model and 3DcVAE(f) Right leg (g) Left leg(g) Left leg (d) Upper torso (f) Right legstructure(C) Full torso(e) ArmFigure 13: Results of segmenting parts (c-g) and learning hierarchical structure (h) on human motions.
Figure 13: Results of segmenting parts (c-g) and learning hierarchical structure (h) on human motions.
Figure 14: Results of segmenting parts (c-g) and learning hierarchical structure (h) on human motions.
Figure A3: Motion distributions of different shapes before and after the structure descriptor. Thefirst row is the ground truth and the second row is the prediction of our model.
Figure A4: Results of R-NEM on different kinds of datasets.
