Figure 1: Learning particle dynamics for control. (a) DPI-Nets learn particle interaction whiledynamically building the interaction graph over time. (b) Build hierarchical graph for multi-scaleeffect propagation. (c) Multi-step message passing for handling instantaneous force propagation. (d)Perception and control with the learned model. Our system first reconstructs the particle-based shapefrom visual observation. It then uses gradient-based trajectory optimization to search for the actionsthat produce the most desired output.
Figure 2: Qualitative results on forward simulation. We compare the ground truth (GT) and therollouts from HRN (Mrowca et al., 2018) and our model (DPI-Net) in four environments (FluidFall,BoxBath, FluidShake, and RiceGrip). The simulations from our DPI-Net are significantly better. Weprovide zoom-in views for a few frames to show details. Please see our video for more empiricalresults.
Figure 3: Ablation studies. We perform ablation studies to test our model’s robustness to hyperpa-rameters. The performance is evaluated by the mean squared distance (×10-2) between the groundtruth and model rollouts. (a) We vary the number of roots when building hierarchy, the propagationstep L during message passing, and the size of the neighborhood d. (b) In BoxBath, DPI-Nets useseparate motion predictors for fluids and rigid bodies. Here we compared with a unified motionpredictor.
Figure 4: Qualitative results on control. (a) FluidShake - Manipulating a box of fluids to match atarget shape. The Result and Target indicate the fluid shape when viewed from the cutaway view.
Figure 5: Quantitative results on control. We show the results on control (as evaluated by theChamfer distance (×10-2) between the manipulated result and the target) for (a) FluidShake and (b)RiceGrip by comparing with four baselines. RL: Model-free deep reinforcement learning optimizedwith PPO; RS: Random search the actions from the learned model and select the best one to execute;RS + TO: Trajectory optimization augmented with model predictive control; RS + TO + ID: Onlinesystem identification by estimating uncertain physical parameters during run time.
Figure 6: Extrapolate generalization on fluids, rigid bodies, and deformable objects. The perfor-mance is evaluated by the MSE (×10-2) between the ground truth and rollouts from DPI-Nets. Theblue bars denote the range of particle numbers that have been seen during training, which indicateinterpolation performance. The red bars indicate extrapolation performance that our model cangeneralize to cases containing two times more particles than cases it has been trained on.
