Figure 1: A schematic IB curve. Dashedline is DPI, dotted line is I (Y ; T ) ≤H(Y). When Y = f(X), the IB curvesaturates both bounds.
Figure 2:	Failure of IB Lagrangian.
Figure 3:	Success of squared-IB func-tional. Thick gray lines shows two pos-sible IB curves, thin lines are isolinesof Lsβq-IB for different β (colors indi-cate different β), stars indicate achievablehI(X; T), I(Y ; T)i that maximize Lsβq-IB.
Figure 4: Theoretical and empirical IB curve found by maximizing the IB Lagrangian (A) and thesquared-IB functional (B). Stars represent solutions recovered for different values of β . Insets showthe bottleneck variable states (i.e., activity of the hidden layer) for different solutions, where colorsrepresent inputs corresponding to different classes (i.e., different digits). MI values in nats.
Figure A5: The top row (A) shows results for the IB Lagrangian, I(Y ; T) - βI(X; T), and thebottom row (B) shows results for the squared-IB functional, I(Y ; T) - βI(X; T)2. In each row, theleft column shows the information plane (compression I(X; T) versus prediction I(Y ; T)), with theblack dashed line showing the DPI bound I(Y ; T) ≤ I(X; T); the middle column shows predictionI(Y ; T) as a function of β; the right column shows compression I(X; T) as a function of β. Inall plots, the solid blue line indicates values calculated for the training data set, the dashed greenline indicates values calculated for the held-out testing data set, and the black dotted line indicatesH(Y ) = ln 10. All information-theoretic quantities are plotted in nats.
Figure A6:	A schematic of thedIB curve. Dashed line is the boundI(Y;T) ≤ H(T), dotted line isI(Y ; T) ≤ H(Y ). When Y is a deter-ministic function ofX, the dIB curve sat-urate the second bound always. Further-more, it also saturates the first bound forany T that is a deterministic function ofY . The qualitative shape of the resultingdIB curve is shown as thick gray line.
Figure A7: Success of squared-dIB functional. Colored lines indicate manifolds which have thesame value of the dIB Lagrangian (left) and the squared-dIB functional (right) for different valuesof β, the stars indicate achievable hH(T), I(Y ; T)i that maximize each function. For the dIB curvewhen Y = f(X), different β values recover different solutions only for the squared-dIB functional.
