Figure 1: Exemplar guided image translation examples of GTA5 → BDD. Best viewed in color.
Figure 2: The xA to xAB translation procedure of our EGSC-IT framework. 1) Source domain imageXA is fed into an encoder EA to compute a shared latent code ZA and is further decoded to a commonhigh-level content representation CA. 2) Meanwhile, xA is also fed into a sub-network to computefeature masks mA. 3) The target domain exemplar image XB is fed to a sub-network to computeaffine parameters YB and βB for AdaIN . 4) The content representation cA is transferred to the targetdomain using mA, YB, βB, and is further decoded to an image xab by target domain generator GB.
Figure 3: Information flow diagrams of auto-encoding procedures xA → xAA and xB → xBB, andtranslation procedures xA → xAB and xB → xBA.
Figure 5: Single-digit translation t-SNE embedding visualization. Red dots: real samples. Bluecrosses: generated samples. Best viewed in color.
Figure 6: Multi-digit translation. Left: testing results. Right: t-SNE embedding visualization. Reddots: real samples. Blue crosses: generated samples. Best viewed in color.
Figure 7: Street view translation testing results. Best viewed in color.
Figure 8: Face gender translation testing results of EGSC-IT. Best viewed in color.
Figure 9: Male→Female translation testing results of EGSC-IT. Best viewed in color.
Figure 10: Letter-digit translation testing results. Note that, models are trained only with single-digitdata.
Figure 11: Single-digit translation t-SNE embedding visualization in larger size. Red dots: realsamples. Blue crosses: generated samples. Best viewed in color.
Figure 12: Multi-digit translation testing results.
Figure 13: Multi-digit translation t-SNE embedding visualization. Red: real samples. Blue: generatedsamples. Best viewed in color.
Figure 14: Street view translation testing results in larger size. Best viewed in color.
Figure 15: Street view translation ablation study results. Zoom in for more details. Best viewed incolor.
