Figure 1: A Toyota Camry XLE in the center of the image fools the Mask R-CNN object detectorafter We apply the learned camouflage to it (on the right), whereas neither plain colors (on the left)nor a random camouflage (in the middle) is able to escape the Camry from being detected.
Figure 2: Example procedure of a transformation t. From left to right: a 16 × 16 camouflage, a high-fidelity vehicle, a location in our simulated environment, and an image due to this transformationover the camouflage.
Figure 3: The camera setup as well as some exemplar locations. The cameras depicted in the greencolor are used to learn the camouflage while those in red are unseen cameras used for testing thecamouflage,s generalization. (H: camera height, L: vehicle-to-camera distance.)IIIInIV4.2	LEARNING A CLONE NETWORK Vθ(c, t) TO APPROXIMATE Vt(c)If we unroll the detection score Vt (c), it contains two major components. The first renders animage based on the camouflage c by following the procedure specified by the transformation t.
Figure 4: Overview of our optimization pipeline and the clone network Vθ(c, t).
Figure 5: The two environments We built to learn and test the vehicle camouflage. Zoom in for moredetails. These images are of the higher resolution but the same rendering quality (anti-aliasing level,shadow quality, rendering distance, texture resolution etc.) the detector perceived.
Figure 6: Orthogonal views of the Toyota Carmy XLE 2015 (second row) and the virtual SUV (firstrow) used in our simulation.
Figure 7: The mIoU and P@0.5 of the 800 random camouflages in different resolutions on Camryin the DownTown environment. There are 100 camouflages per resolution.
Figure 8: Visualization of three random camouflages of resolutions 4 X 4, 16 X 16, and 256 X 256,respectively, as well as the resulting images by the same camera.
Figure 9: Clone network’s learned camouflage’s classification score and mIoU vs. Simulation called.
Figure 10: The best detections in each image and the gradient heatmap of their classification scoresw.r.t. the input images. The detector places its attention predominantly on the upper car body, i.e.,roof, hood, trunk, and windows.
Figure 11: Qualitative comparison of the Mask R-CNN detections results of the grey baseline color,random camouflages and our learned camouflages in different transformations. Zoom in for more“kite” Not detecteddetails.
Figure 12: A fraction of different Toyota sedan appearances in MS COCO dataset.
