Figure 1: Comparison of linear interpolations from DCGAN trained on the Cauchy distribution (top)and one trained on the distribution proposed by Kilcher et al. (2017) (bottom).
Figure 2: Illustration of observation 2.1: distributions of Euclidean norms of latent vectors, fordifferent probability distributions, with increasing latent space dimension.
Figure 3: Comparison of the Cauchy-linear (a, b, and c) and the Spherical Cauchy-linear (d) in-terpolations on a 2D plane for data pairs sampled from different distributions. The Cauchy-linearinterpolation in conjunction with the Cauchy distribution naturally results in segments.
Figure 4: Illustration of observation 3.3: comparison of norms of interpolation mid-points for linear(blue), Cauchy-linear (orange) interpolations, and latent prior distribution (dark line) for differentlatent distributions.
Figure 5: Images generated using a DCGAN model trained on the standard Normal distribution.
Figure 6: Emergence of sensible samples decoded near the origin of the latent space throughoutthe training process. Demonstrated using interpolations between opposite vectors sampled from thelatent space.
Figure 7: Linear interpolations between hand-picked points from tails of the Cauchy distribution.
Figure 8: Generated images from samples from the Cauchy distribution, with occasional "failed"images from tails of the distribution.
Figure 9: Images generated from samples from the Cauchy distribution, with varying dimension ofthe latent space.
Figure 10: Linear interpolations between random latent vectors. The model was trained using theCauchy distribution.
Figure 11: Linear interpolations between opposite latent vectors. The model was trained using theCauchy distribution.
Figure 12: Cauchy-linear interpolations between opposite latent vectors. The model was trainedusing the normal distribution.
Figure 13: Cauchy-linear interpolations between random latent vectors. The model was trainedusing the normal distribution.
Figure 14: Spherical Cauchy-linear interpolations between random latent vectors. The model wastrained using the normal distribution.
