Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Training and Inference with Integers in Deep
Neural Networks
Shuang Wu1 , Guoqi Li1 , Feng Chen2, Luping Shi1
1	Department of Precision Instrument
2	Department of Automation
Center for Brain Inspired Computing Research
Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chip
Tsinghua University
{lpshi,chenfeng}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Ab stract
Researches on deep neural networks with discrete parameters and their deploy-
ment in embedded systems have been active and promising topics. Although pre-
vious works have successfully reduced precision in inference, transferring both
training and inference processes to low-bitwidth integers has not been demon-
strated simultaneously. In this work, we develop a new method termed as
“WAGE” to discretize both training and inference, where weights (W), activations
(A), gradients (G) and errors (E) among layers are shifted and linearly constrained
to low-bitwidth integers. To perform pure discrete dataflow for fixed-point de-
vices, we further replace batch normalization by a constant scaling layer and sim-
plify other components that are arduous for integer implementation. Improved ac-
curacies can be obtained on multiple datasets, which indicates that WAGE some-
how acts as a type of regularization. Empirically, we demonstrate the potential
to deploy training in hardware systems such as integer-based deep learning ac-
celerators and neuromorphic chips with comparable accuracy and higher energy
efficiency, which is crucial to future AI applications in variable scenarios with
transfer and continual learning demands.
1	Introduction
Recently deep neural networks (DNNs) are being widely used for numerous AI applications
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2016). Depending on the massive tunable
parameters, DNNs are considered to have powerful multi-level feature extraction and representation
abilities. However, training DNNs needs energy-intensive devices such as GPU and CPU with high
precision (float32) processing units and abundant memory, which has greatly challenged their exten-
sive applications for portable devices. In addition, a state-of-art network often has far more weights
and effective capacity to shatter all training samples (Zhang et al., 2016), leading to overfitting easily.
As a result, there is much interest in reducing the size of network during inference (Hubara et al.,
2016; Rastegari et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016), as well as dedicated hardware for commercial solutions
(Jouppi et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2015). Due to the accumulation in stochastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) optimization, the precision demand for training is usually higher than inference
(Hubara et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017). Therefore, most of the existing techniques only focus on the
deployment of a well-trained compressed network, while still keeping high precision and compu-
tational complexity during training. In this work, we address this problem as how to process both
training and inference with low-bitwidth integers, which is essential for implementing DNNs in ded-
icated hardware. To this end, two fundamental issues are addressed for discretely training DNNs: i)
how to quantize all the operands and operations, and ii) how many bits or states are needed for SGD
computation and accumulation.
With respect to the issues, we propose a framework termed as “WAGE” that constrains weights (W),
activations (A), gradients (G) and errors (E) among all layers to low-bitwidth integers in both training
and inference. Firstly, for operands, linear mapping and orientation-preserved shifting are applied
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
to achieve ternary weights, 8-bit integers for activations and gradients accumulation. Secondly, for
operations, batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) is replaced by a constant scaling factor.
Other techniques for fine-tuning such as SGD optimizer with momentum and L2 regularization are
simplified or abandoned with little performance degradation. Considering the overall bidirectional
propagation, we completely streamline inference into accumulate-compare cycles and training into
low-bitwidth multiply-accumulate (MAC) cycles with alignment operations, respectively.
We heuristically explore the bitwidth requirements of integers for error computation and gradient
accumulation, which have rarely been discussed in previous works. Experiments indicate that it
is the relative values (orientations) rather than absolute values (orders of magnitude) in error that
guides previous layers to converge. Moreover, small values have negligible effects on previous
orientations though propagated layer by layer, which can be partially discarded in quantization. We
leverage these phenomena and use an orientation-preserved shifting operation to constrain errors.
As for the gradient accumulation, though weights are quantized to ternary values in inference, a
relatively higher bitwidth is indispensable to store and accumulate gradient updates.
The proposed framework is evaluated on MNIST, CIFAR10, SVHN, ImageNet datasets. Comparing
to those who only discretize weights and activations at inference time, it has comparable accuracy
and can further alleviate overfitting, indicating some type of regularization. WAGE produces pure
bidirectional low-precision integer dataflow for DNNs, which can be applied for training and infer-
ence in dedicated hardware neatly. We publish the code on GitHub1.
2	Related Work
We mainly focus on reducing precision of operands and operations in both training and infer-
ence. Orthogonal and complementary techniques for reducing complexity like network compres-
sion, pruning (Han et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2017) and compact architectures (Howard et al., 2017)
are impressively efficient but outside the scope this paper.
Weight and activation Courbariaux et al. (2015); Hubara et al. (2016) propose methods to train
DNNs with binary weights (BC) and activations (BNN) successively. They add noises to weights
and activations as a form of regularization but real-valued gradients are accumulated in real-valued
variables, suggesting that high precision accumulation is likely required for SGD optimization.
XNOR-Net (Rastegari et al., 2016) has a filter-wise scaling factor for weights to improve the per-
formance. Convolutions in XNOR-Net can be implemented efficiently using XNOR logical units
and bit-count operations. However, these floating-point factors are calculated simultaneously during
training, which generally aggravates the training effort. In TWN (Li et al., 2016) and TTQ (Zhu
et al., 2016) two symmetric thresholds are introduced to constrain the weights to be ternary-valued:
{+1, 0, -1}. They claimed a tradeoff between model complexity and expressive ability.
Gradient computation and accumulation DoReFa-Net (Zhou et al., 2016) quantizes gradients
to low-bitwidth floating-point numbers with discrete states in the backward pass. TernGrad (Wen
et al., 2017) quantizes gradient updates to ternary values to reduce the overhead of gradient syn-
chronization in distributed training. Nevertheless, weights in DoReFa-Net and TernGrad are stored
and updated with float32 during training like previous works. Besides, the quantization of batch
normalization and its derivative is ignored. Thus, the overall computation graph for the training
process is still presented with float32 and more complex with external quantization. Generally, it is
difficult to apply DoReFa-Net training in an integer-based hardware directly, but it shows potential
for exploring high-dimensional discrete spaces with discrete gradient descent directions.
3	WAGE Quantization
The main idea of WAGE quantization is to constrain four operands to low-bitwidth integers: weight
W and activation a in inference, error e and gradient g in backpropagation training, see Figure 1.
We extend the original definition of errors to multi-layer: error e is the gradient of activation a for
the perspective of each convolution or fully-connected layer, while gradient g particularly refers to
the gradient accumulation of weight W . Considering the i-th layer of a feed-forward network, we
1https://github.com/boluoweifenda/WAGE
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
have:
ei = ∂L gi =空
∂ai, g	∂ Wi
(1)
where L is the loss function. We separate these two terms that are mixed up in most existing
schemes. The gradient of weight gand the gradient of activation e flow to different paths in each
layer, which is a fork both in inference and in backward training and generally acts as node of MAC
operations.
For the forward propagation in the i-th layer, assuming that weights are stored and accumulated
with kG-bit integers, then numerous works strive for a better quantization function QW(∙) that maps
higher precision weights to their kW -bit reflections, for example, [-0.9, 0.1, 0.7] to [-1, 0, 1]. Al-
though weights are accumulated with high precision like float32, the deployment of the reflections
in dedicated hardware are much more memory efficient after training. Activations are quantized
with function Qa(∙) to kA bits to align the increased bitwidth caused by MACs. Weights and acti-
vations are discretized to even binary values in previous works, then MACs degrade into logical and
bit-count operations that are extremely efficient (Rastegari et al., 2016).
For the backward propagation in the i-th layer, the gradients of activations and weights are calculated
by the derivatives of MACs that are generally considered to be in 16-bit floating-point precision at
least. As illustrated in Figure 1, the MACs between kA-bit inputs and kw -bit weights will increase
the bitwidth of outputs to [kA + kw - 1] in signed integer representation, and the similar broadening
happens to errors e as well. In consideration of training with only low-bitwidth integers, we propose
additional functions QE(∙) and Qg(∙) to constrain bitwidth of e and g to kE bits and kg bits,
respectively. In general, where there is a MAC operation, there are quantization operators named
Qw(∙), Qa(∙), Qg(∙) and QE(∙) in inference and backpropagation.
O : operand □ : operation	---►: dataflow	[ ]: bit width
Figure 1: Four operators QW(∙), Qa(∙), Qg(∙), Qe(∙) added in WAGE computation dataflow to
reduce precision, bitwidth of signed integers are below or on the right of arrows, activations are
included in MAC for concision.
3.1	Shift-based Linear Mapping and Stochastic Rounding
In WAGE quantization, we adopt a linear mapping with k-bit integers for simplicity, where contin-
uous and unbounded values are discretized with uniform distance σ :
σ(k) = 21-k, k ∈ N+
(2)
Then the basic quantization function that converts a floating-point number x to its k-bitwidth signed
integer representation can be formulated as:
Q(x, k) = Clip σ(k) ∙ round	, —1 + σ(k), 1 — σ(k)
(3)
where round approximates continuous values to their nearest discrete states. Clip is the saturation
function that clips unbounded values to [-1 + σ, 1 - σ], where the negative maximum value -1 is
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
removed to maintain symmetry. For example, Q(x, 2) quantizes {-1, 0.2, 0.6} to {-0.5, 0, 0.5}.
Equation 3 is merely used for simulation in floating-point hardware like GPU, whereas in a fixed-
point device, quantization and saturation is satisfied automatically.
Before applying linear mapping in some operands (e.g., error), We introduce an additional mono-
lithic scaling factor for shifting values distribution to an appropriate order of magnitude, otherwise
values will be all saturated or cleared by Equation 3. The scaling factor is calculated by Shift
function and then divided in later steps:
Shift(x) = 2round(IOg2 X)	⑷
Finally, we propose stochastic rounding to substitute small and real-valued updates for gradient
accumulation in training. Section 3.3.4 will detail the implementation of operator QG(∙), where
high bitwidth gradients are constrained to kg-bit integers stochastically by a 16-bit random number
generator. Figure 2 summarizes quantization methods used in WAGE.
σ 二 21^fc
rS
AJlSUəa
Clip
X
ʤuəa
1
1e-8	1e-4
[px=[x∖ = l^∣χ∣l — ∣χ∣
IPX=m=IxI-UXu
Stochastic Rounding
k-bit Linear Mapping
Distribution Shifting
O
1	2
Figure 2: Quantization methods used in WAGE. The notation P, x, [∙] and「•] denotes probability,
vector, floor and ceil, respectively. ShiftG) refers to Equation 4 with a certain argument.
3.2	Weight Initialization
In previous works, weights are binarized directly by sgn function or ternarized by threshold pa-
rameters calculated during training. However, BNN fails to converge without batch normalization
because weight values ±1 are rather big for a typical DNN. Batch normalization not only efficiently
avoids the problem of exploding and vanishing gradients, but also alleviates the demand for proper
initialization. However, normalizing outputs for each layer and computing their gradients are quite
complex without floating point unit (FPU). Besides, the moving averages of batch outputs occupy
external memory. BNN shows a shift-based variation of batch normalization but it is hard to trans-
form all of the elements to the fixed-point representations. As a result, weights should be cautiously
initialized in this work where batch normalization is simplified to a constant scaling layer. A modi-
fied initialization method based on MSRA (He et al., 2015) can be formulated as:
W 〜U(-L,+L),L = max{√6∕nin, Lmin}, Lmin = βσ	(5)
where nn is the layer fan-in number, and the original limit ʌ/θ/nin in MSRA is calculated to keep
same variance between inputs and outputs of the same layer theoretically. The additional limit Lmin
is a minimum value that the uniform distribution U should reach, and β is a constant greater than
1 to create overlaps between minimum step size σ and maximum value L. In case of kW -bit linear
mapping, if weights W are quantized directly with original limits, we will get all-zero tensors when
bitwidth kW is small enough, e.g., 4, or fan-in nin is wide enough, where initialized weights may
never reach the minimum step σ presented by fixed-point integers. So Lmin ensures that weights
can go beyond σ and quantized to non-zero values after QW (∙) when initialized randomly.
3.3	Quantization Details
3.3.1	Weight Qw(∙)
The modified initialization in Equation 5 will amplify weights holistically and guarantee their proper
distribution, then W is quantized directly with Equation 3:
Wq = QW(W) = Q(W,kW)	(6)
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
It should be noted that the variance of weights is scaled compared to the original limit, which will
cause exploding of network’s outputs. To alleviate the amplification effect, XNOR-Net proposed
a filter-wise scaling factor calculated continuously with full precision. In consideration of integer
implementation, we introduce a layer-wise shift-based scaling factor α to attenuate the amplification
effect:
α = max{Shift(Lmin/L), 1}
(7)
where α is a pre-defined constant for each layer determined by the network structure. The modified
initialization and attenuation factor α together approximates floating-point weights to their integer
representations, except that α takes effect after activations to maintain precision of weights presented
by kW -bit integers.
3.3.2	Activation Qa(∙)
As stated above, the bitwidth of operands increases after MACs. Then a typical CNN is usually
followed with pooling, normalization and activation. Average pooling is avoided because mean op-
erations will increase precision demand. Besides, we hypothesize that batch outputs of each hidden
layer approximately have zero-mean, then batch normalization degenerates into to a scaling layer
where trainable and batch-calculated scaling parameters are replaced by α mentioned in Equation 7.
if activations are presented in kA bits, the overall quantization of activations can be formulated as:
aq = QA(a) = Q(a/a, kA)
(8)
3.3.3	ERROR Qe(∙)
Errors e are calculated layer by layer using the chain rule during training. Although the computation
graph of backpropagation is similar to the inference, the inputs are the gradients of L, which are
relatively small compared to actual inputs for networks. More importantly, the errors are unbounded
and might have significantly larger ranges than that of activations, e.g., [10-9, 10-4]. DoReFa-Net
first applies an affine transform on e to map them into [-1, 1], and then inverts the transform after
quantization. Thus, the quantized e are still presented as float32 numbers with discrete states and
mostly small values.
However, experiments uncover that it is the orientations rather than orders of magnitude in errors that
guides previous layers to converge, then the inverse transformation after quantization in DoReFa-Net
is no longer needed. The orientation-only preservation prompts Us to propagate errors with integer
thoroughly, where error distribution is firstly scaled into [- √2, +√2] by dividing a shift factor as
shown in FigUre 2 and then qUantized by Q(e, kE):
eq = QE(e) = Q(e/Shift(max{|e|}),kE)
(9)
where max{|e|} extracts the layer-wise maximum absolute value among all elements in error e,
multi-channel for convolution and multi-sample for batch training. The quantization of error dis-
cards large proportion of values smaller than σ, we will discuss the influence on accuracy later.
3.3.4	Gradient Qg(∙)
Since we only preserve relative values of error after shifting, the gradient updates g derived from
MACs between backward errors e and forward activations a are shifted consequently. We first
rescale gradients g with another scaling factor and then bring in shift-based learning rate η:
gs = η ∙ g/Shift(max{∖g∖})
(10)
where η is an integer power of 2. The shifted gradients gs represent for minimum step numbers
and directions for updating weights. if weights are stored with kG-bit numbers, the minimum step
of modification will be ±1 for integers and ±σ(kG) for floating-point values, respectively. The
implement of learning rate η here is quite different from that in a vanilla DNN based on float32. in
WAGE, there only remain directions for weights to change and the step sizes are integer multiples
of minimum step σ. Shifted gradients gs may get greater than 1 if η is 2 or bigger to accelerate
training at the beginning, or smaller than 0.5 during latter half of training when learning rate decay
is usually applied. As illustrated in Figure 2, to substitute accumulation of small gradients in latter
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
case, we separate gs into integer parts and decimal parts, then use a 16-bit random number generator
to constrain high bitwidth gs to kG-bit integers stochastically:
∆W = QG(g) = σ(kg) ∙ sgn(gs) ∙ { b∣gs∣C + Bernoulli(® \ -[回")}	(11)
where Bernoulli (Zhou et al., 2016) stochastically samples decimal parts to either 0 or 1. With
proper setting of kG, quantization of gradients will restrict the minimum step size, which may avoid
local minimum and overfitting. Furthermore, the gradients will be ternary values when η is not
greater than 1, which reduces communication costs for distributed training (Wen et al., 2017). At
last, weights W might exceed the range [-1 + σ, 1 - σ] presented by kG-bit integers after updating
with discrete increments ∆W. So Clip function is indispensable to saturate and make sure there
are only 2kG-1 - 1 states for weights accumulation. In case of the t-th iteration, we have:
Wt+1 =Clip{Wt -∆Wt,-1+σ(kG),1 - σ(kG)}	(12)
3.4 Miscellaneous
From the above, we have illustrated our quantization methods for weights, activations, gradients and
errors. See Algorithm 1 for the detailed computation graph. There remain some issues to specify in
an overall training process with only integers.
Gradient descent optimizer like Momentum, RMSProp and Adam contains at least one copy of
gradient updates ∆W or their moving average, doubling memory consumption for weights during
training, which is partially equivalent to use bigger kG. Since the weight updates ∆W are quan-
tized to integer multiple of σ and scaled by η, we adopt pure mini-batch SGD without any form of
momentum or adaptive learning rate to show the potential of reducing storage demands.
Although L2 regularization works quite well for many large-scale DNNs where overfitting occurs
commonly, WAGE removes small values in Equation 3 and introduces randomness in Equation 11,
acting as certain types of regularization and can get comparable accuracy in later experiments. Thus,
we remain L2 weight decay and dropout as supplementary regularization methods.
The Softmax layer and cross-entropy criterion are widely adopted in classification tasks but the
calculation of ex can hardly be applied in low-bitwidth linear mapping occasions. For tasks with
small number of categories, we avoid Softmax layer and apply mean-square-error criterion but omit
mean operation to form a sum-square-error (SSE) criterion since shifted errors will get the same
values in Equation 9.
4	Experiments
In this section, we set W-A-G-E bits to 2-8-8-8 as default for all layers in a CNN or MLP. The
bitwidth kW is 2 for ternary weights, which implies that there are no multiplications during infer-
ence. Constant parameter β is 1.5 to make equal probabilities for ternary weights when initial-
ized randomly. Activations and errors should be of the same bitwidth since computation graph of
backpropagation is similar to inference and might be applied in the same partition of hardware or
memristor array (Sheridan et al., 2017). Although XNOR-Net achieves 1-bit activations, reducing
errors to 4 or less bits dramatically degenerates accuracies in our tests, so the bitwidth kA and kE are
increased to 8 simultaneously. Weights are stored with 8-bit integers during training and ternarized
by two constant symmetrical thresholds during inference. We first build the computation graph for
a vanilla network, then insert quantization nodes in forward propagation and override gradients in
backward propagation for each layer on Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016). Our method is evaluated
on MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR10 and ILSVRC12 (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and Table 1 shows the
comparison results.
4.1	Implement Details
MNIST: A variation of LeNet-5 (LeCun et al., 1998) with 32C5-MP2-64C5-MP2-512FC-10SSE is
adopted. The input grayscale images are regarded as activations and quantized by Equation 8 where
α equals to 1. The learning rate η in WAGE remains as 1 for the whole 100 epochs. We report
average accuracy of 10 runs on the test set.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
SVHN & CIFAR10: We use a VGG-like network (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) with 2×(128C3)-
MP2-2×(256C3)-MP2-2×(512C3)-MP2-1024FC-10SSE. For CIFAR10 dataset, we follow the data
augmentation in Lee et al. (2015) for training: 4 pixels are padded on each side, and a 32×32 patch
is randomly cropped from the padded image or its horizontal flip. For testing, only single view of
the original 32×32 image is evaluated. The model is trained with mini-batch size of 128 and totally
300 epochs. Learning rate η is set to 8 and divided by 8 at epoch 200 and epoch 250. The original
images are scaled and biased to the range of [-1, +1] for 8-bit integer activation representation. As
for SVHN dataset, we leave out randomly flip augmentation and reduce training epochs to 40 since
it is a rather big dataset. The error rate is evaluated in the same way as MNIST.
ImageNet: WAGE framework is evaluated on ILSVRC12 dataset with AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) model but removes dropout and local response normalization layers. Images are firstly resized
to 256×256 then randomly cropped to 224×224 and horizontally flipped, followed by bias subtrac-
tion as CIFAR10. For testing, the single center crop in validation set is evaluated. Since ImageNet
task is much difficult than CIFAR10 and has 1000 categories, it is hard to converge when applying
SSE or hinge loss criterion in WAGE, so we add Softmax and remove quantizations in the last layer
for fear of severe accuracy drop (Tang et al., 2017). The model is trained with mini-batch size of
256 and totally 70 epochs. Learning rate η is set to 4 and divided by 8 at epoch 60 and epoch 65.
Table 1: Test or validation error rates (%) in previous works and WAGE on multiple datasets. Opt
denotes gradient descent optimizer and withM means SGD with momentum, BN represents for batch
normalization and 32 bits refers to float32, ImageNet top-k format: top1/top5.
Method	kW	kA	kG	kE	OPt	BN	MNIST	SVHN	CIFAR10	ImageNet
BC	1	32	32	32	Adam	~τ~	1.29	2.30	9.90	-
BNN	1	1	32	32	Adam	/	0.96	2.53	10.15	-
BWN1	1	32	32	32	withM	/	-	-	-	43.2/20.6
XNOR	1	1	32	32	Adam	/	-	-	-	55.8/30.8
TWN	2	32	32	32	withM	/	0.65	-	7.44	34.7/13.8
TTQ	2	32	32	32	Adam	/	-	-	6.44	42.5/20.3
DoReFa2	8	8	32	8	Adam	/	-	2.30	-	47.0/ -
TernGrad3	32	32	2	32	Adam	/	-	-	14.36	42.4/19.5
WAGE	2	8	8	8	SGD	X	0.40	1.92	6.78	51.6/27.8
4.2	Training Curves and Regularization
We further compare WAGE variations and a vanilla CNN on CIFAR10. The vanilla CNN has the
same VGG-like architecture described above except that none quantization of any operand or oper-
ation is applied. We add batch normalization in each layer and Softmax for the last layer, replace
SSE with cross-entropy criterion, and then use a L2 weight decay of 1e-4 and momentum of 0.9
for training. The learning rate is set to 0.1 and divided by 10 at epoch 200 and epoch 250. For
variations of WAGE, pattern 28ff has no quantization nodes in backpropagation. Although the 28ff
pattern has the same optimizer and learning rate annealing method as the vanilla pattern, we find
that weight updates are decreased by the rescale factor α in Equation 7. Therefore, the learning rate
for 28ff is amplified and tuned, which reduces the error rate by 3%. Figure 3 shows the training
curves of three counterparts. It can be seen that the 2888 pattern has comparable convergence rate to
the vanilla CNN, better accuracy than those who only discretize weights and activations in inference
time, though slightly more volatile. The discretization of backpropagation somehow acts as another
type of regularization and have significant error rate drop when decreasing learning rate η.
1BWN is the counterpart of XNOR that only quantizes weights
2They use floating-point presentation for errors
3Only for worker-to-server communication in distributed training, weights are accumulated with float32
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 3: Training curves of WAGE variations and a vanilla CNN on CIFAR10.
4.3	Bitwidth of Errors
The bitwidth kE is set to 8 as default in previous experiments. To further explore a proper bitwidth
and its truncated boundary, we firstly export errors from vanilla CNN for CIFAR10 after 100 training
epochs. The histogram of errors in the last convolution layer among 128 mini-batch data is shown
in Figure 4. It is obvious that errors approximately obey logarithmic normal distribution where val-
ues are relatively small and have significantly large range. When quantized with kE -bit integers, a
proper window function should be chosen to truncate the distribution while retaining the approxi-
mate orientations for backpropagation. For more details about the layerwise histograms of all W, A,
G, E operands, see Figure 5.
Firstly, the upper (right) boundary is immobilized to the maximum absolute value among all ele-
ments in errors as described in Equation 9. Then the left boundary will be based on the bitwidth kE .
We conduct a series of experiments for kE ranging from 4 to 15. The boxplot in Figure 4 indicates
that 4-8 bits of errors represented by integers are enough for CIFAR10 classification task. Bitwidth
8 is chosen as default to match the 8-bit image color levels and most operands in the micro con-
trol unit (MCU). The histogram of errors in the same layer of WAGE-2888 shows that after being
shifted and quantized layer by layer, the distribution of errors reshapes and mostly aggregates into
truncated window. Thus, most information for orientations is retained. Besides, the smaller values
in errors have negligible effects on previous orientations though accumulated layer by layer, which
are partially discarded in quantization.
Since the width of the window has been optimized, we left-shift the window with factor γ to explore
its horizontal position. The right boundary can be formulated as max{∣e∣}∕γ. Table 2 shows
the effect of shifting errors: although large values are in the minority, they play critical roles for
backpropagation training while the majority with small values actually act as noises.
Table 2: Test error rates (%) on CIFAR10 when left-shift upper boundary with factor γ.
γ	1	2	4	8
error	6.78	7.31	8.08	16.92
4.4	Bitwidth of Gradients
The bitwidth kG is set to 8 as default in previous experiments. Although weights are propagated with
ternary values in inference and achieve 16× compression rate than float32 weights, they are saved
and accumulated in a relatively higher bitwidth (8 bits) for backpropagation training. Therefore, the
overall compression rate is only 4×. The inconsistent bitwidth between weight updates kG and their
effects in inference kW provides indispensable buffer space. Otherwise, there might be too many
weights changing their ternary values in each iteration, making training very slow and unstable. To
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 4: Left are histograms of errors e for same layer in vanilla network and WAGE-2888 network.
Upper boundaries are the max{|e|} while lower boundaries are determined by the bitwidth kE. The
10 run accuracies of different kE are shown on the right.
Accuracies with different 卜七
kE
further explore a proper bitwidth for gradients, we use WAGE 2-8-8-8 in CIFAR10 as baseline and
range kG from 2 to 12, the learning rate η is divided by 2 every time the kG decreases 1 bit to keep
approximately equal weights accumulation in large number of iterations. Results from Table 3 show
the effect of kG and indicate the similar bitwidth requirement as previous experiments for kE .
Table 3: Test error rates (%) on CIFAR10 with different kG.
kG	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12
error	54.22	51.57	28.22	18.01	11.48	7.61	6.78	6.63	6.43	6.55	6.57
For ImageNet implementation, we conduct six patterns to show bitwidth requirements: 2888 from
Table 1, 288C for more accurate errors (12 bits), 28C8 for larger buffer space, 28f8 for none quanti-
zation of gradients, 28ff for errors and gradients in float32 as unlimited case and its BN counterpart.
The accuracy of original AlexNet reproduction is reported as baseline. Learning rate η is set to 64
and divided by 8 in 28C8 pattern, 0.01 and divided by 10 in 28f8, 28ff counterparts and vanilla
AlexNet. We observe overfitting when increasing kG thus add L2 weight decay of 1e-4, 1e-4 and
5e-4 for 28f8, 28ff and 28ff-BN patterns, respectively. In table 4, the comparison between pattern
28C8 and 288C reveals that it might be more important to make more buffer space kG for gradi-
ent accumulation than to keep high-resolution orientation kE . Besides, when it comes to ImageNet
dataset, the gradient accumulation, i.e., the bit width of gradients (kG) and batch normalization
become more important (Li et al., 2017) since samples in training set are so variant.
To avoid external memory consumption of full-precision weights during training, Deng et al. (2018)
achieved 1-bit weights representation in both training and inference. They use a much larger mini-
batch size of 1000 and float32 backpropagation dataflow to accumulate more precise weight updates,
equally compensating the buffer space in WAGE provided by external bits of kG. However, large
batch size will dramatically increase total training time, counteracting the speed benefits brought
by integer arithmetic units. Besides, intermediate variables like feature maps often consume much
more memory than weights and linearly correlated with mini-batch size. Therefore, we apply bigger
kG for better convergence rate, accuracy and lower memory usage.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Table 4: Top-5 error rates (%) on ImageNet with different kG and kE .
Pattern	Vanilla	28ff-BN	28ff	28f8	28C8	288C	2888
error	19.29	20.67	24.14	23.92	26.88	28.06	27.82
5	Discussion and Future Work
The goal of this work is to demonstrate potentials of applying training and inference with low-
bitwidth integers in DNNs. Compared with FP16, 8-bit integer operations will not only reduce the
energy and area costs for IC design (about 5×, see Table 5), but also halve the memory accesses
costs and memory size requirements during training, which will greatly benefit mobile devices with
on-site learning capability. There are some points not involved in this work but yet to be improved
or solved in future algorithm developments and hardware deployment.
MAC Operation: WAGE framework is mainly tested with 2-8-8-8 bitwidth configuration, which
means that though there are no multiplications during inference with ternary weights, MACs are
still needed to calculate g in training. Possible solution is 2-2-8-8 pattern if we do not consider the
matching of bitwidths between a and e. However, ternary a will dramatically slow down conver-
gence and hurt accuracy since Q(x, 2) has two relatively high thresholds and clear most outputs of
each layer at the beginning of training, this phenomenon is also observed in our BNN replication.
Non-linear quantization: The linear mapping with uniform distance is adopted in WAGE for its
simplicity. However, non-linear quantization method like logarithmic representation (Miyashita
et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017) might be more efficient because the weights and activations in a
trained network naturally have logarithmic normal distributions as shown in Figure 4. Besides,
values in logarithmic representation have much larger range with fewer bits than fixed-point rep-
resentation and are naturally encoded in digital hardware. It is promising to training DNNs with
integers encoded with logarithmic representation.
Normalization: Normalization layers like Softmax and batch normalization are avoided or removed
in some WAGE demonstrations. We think normalizations are essential for end-to-end multi-channel
perception where sensors with different modalities have different input distributions, as well as
cross-model features encoding and cognition where information from different branches gather to
form higher-level representations. Therefore, a better way to quantize normalization is of great
interest in further studies.
Table 5: Rough relative costs in 45nm 0.9V from Sze et al. (2017).
Operation	Energy(PJ)		Area(μm2)	
	MUL	ADD	MUL	ADD
8-bit INT	0.2pJ	0.03 PJ	282	36
16-bit FP	1.1pJ	0.40 pJ	1640	1360
32-bit FP	3.7 pJ	0.90 pJ	7700	4184
6	Conclusion
WAGE empowers pure low-bitwidth integer dataflow in DNNs for both training and inference. We
introduce a new initialization method and a layer-wise constant scaling factor to replace batch nor-
malization, which is a pain spot for network quantization. Many other components for training are
also considered or simplified by alternative solutions. In addition, the bitwidth requirements for
error computation and gradient accumulation are explored. Experiments reveal that we can quan-
tize relative values of gradients, as well as discard the majority of small values and their orders of
magnitude in backpropagation. Although the accumulation for weights updates are indispensable
for stable convergence and final accuracy, there still remain works for compression and memory
consumption can be further reduced in training. WAGE achieves state-of-art accuracies on multiple
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
datasets with 2-8-8-8 bitwidth configuration. It is promising for incremental works via fine-tuning,
more efficient mapping, quantization of batch normalization, etc. Overall, we introduce a frame-
work without floating-point representation and demonstrate the potential to implement both discrete
training and inference on integer-based lightweight ASIC or FPGA with on-site learning capability.
Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by the Project of NSFC (61327902), the SuZhou-Tsinghua innova-
tion leading program (2016SZ0102), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61603209)
and the Independent Research Plan of Tsinghua University (20151080467). We discuss a lot with
Peng Jiao and Lei Deng, gratefully acknowledge for their thoughtful comments.
References
Martin Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, MatthieU
Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorflow: A system for large-
scale machine learning. In OSDI, volume 16, pp. 265-283, 2016.
Yu-Hsin Chen, Tushar Krishna, Joel S Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Eyeriss: An energy-efficient re-
configurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE Journal of Solid-State
Circuits, 52(1):127-138, 2017.
Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre David. Binaryconnect: Training deep neural
networks with binary weights during propagations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 3123-3131, 2015.
Lei Deng, Peng Jiao, Jing Pei, Zhenzhi Wu, and Guoqi Li. Gxnor-net: Training deep neural networks
with ternary weights and activations without full-precision memory under a unified discretization
framework. Neural Networks, 2018.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pp. 1026-1034, 2015.
Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly,
Andrew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N Sainath, et al. Deep neural networks
for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):82-97, 2012.
Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand,
Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for
mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. Binarized
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4107-4115, 2016.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 448-456,
2015.
Norman P Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa,
Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, et al. In-datacenter performance analy-
sis of a tensor processing unit. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, pp. 1-12. ACM, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1097-1105,
2012.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Yann LeCun, Leon Bottou, YoshUa Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278-2324,1998.
Chen-Yu Lee, Saining Xie, Patrick Gallagher, Zhengyou Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Deeply-
supervised nets. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 562-570, 2015.
Fengfu Li, Bo Zhang, and Bin Liu. Ternary weight networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04711,
2016.
Hao Li, Soham De, Zheng Xu, Christoph Studer, Hanan Samet, and Tom Goldstein. Training
quantized nets: A deeper understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 5813-5823, 2017.
Daisuke Miyashita, Edward H Lee, and Boris Murmann. Convolutional neural networks using
logarithmic data representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01025, 2016.
Mohammad Rastegari, Vicente Ordonez, Joseph Redmon, and Ali Farhadi. Xnor-net: Imagenet
classification using binary convolutional neural networks. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 525-542. Springer, 2016.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211-252, 2015.
Patrick M Sheridan, Fuxi Cai, Chao Du, Wen Ma, Zhengya Zhang, and Wei D Lu. Sparse coding
with memristor networks. Nature nanotechnology, 12(8):784, 2017.
Luping Shi, Jing Pei, Ning Deng, Dong Wang, Lei Deng, Yu Wang, Youhui Zhang, Feng Chen,
Mingguo Zhao, Sen Song, et al. Development of a neuromorphic computing system. In Electron
Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2015 IEEE International, pp. 4-3. IEEE, 2015.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484-489, 2016.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Vivienne Sze, Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, and Joel S Emer. Efficient processing of deep neural
networks: A tutorial and survey. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(12):2295-2329, 2017.
Wei Tang, Gang Hua, and Liang Wang. How to train a compact binary neural network with high
accuracy? In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Wei Wen, Cong Xu, Feng Yan, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. Terngrad:
Ternary gradients to reduce communication in distributed deep learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pp. 1508-1518, 2017.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
deep learning requires rethinking generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530, 2016.
Aojun Zhou, Anbang Yao, Yiwen Guo, Lin Xu, and Yurong Chen. Incremental network quantiza-
tion: Towards lossless cnns with low-precision weights. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03044, 2017.
Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen, and Yuheng Zou. Dorefa-net: Train-
ing low bitwidth convolutional neural networks with low bitwidth gradients. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.06160, 2016.
Chenzhuo Zhu, Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Trained ternary quantization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.01064, 2016.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
A Algorithm
We assume that network structures are defined and initialized with Equation 5. The annotations after
pseudo code are potential corresponding operations for implementation in a fixed-point dataflow.
Algorithm 1 Training an I-layer net with WAGE method on floating-point-based or integer-based
device. Weights, activations, gradients and errors are quantized according to Equations 6 - 12.
Require: a mini-batch of inputs and targets (a0, a*) which are quantized to kA-bit integers, Shift-
based α for each layer, learning rate scheduler η, previous weight W saved in kG bits.
Ensure: updated weights Wt+1
1. Forward propagation:
1	: for i = 1 to I do	
2	Wi 一 Qw(Wi)	#Clip
3	ai 一 ReLU&-皿；)	#MAC, Clip
4	aiq — Qa(ai)	#Shift, Clip
5	: end for 2. Back propagation: Compute eI J IaI knowing aI and a*	#Substrate
6	: for i = I to 1 do	
7	:	eiq J QE (ei)	#Max, Shift, Clip
8	:	ei-1 J eiqWqi	#MAC, Clip
9	:	gi J eiqTaiq-1	#MAC, Clip
10	:	∆Wi J QG(gi)	#Max, Shift, Random, Clip
11	: Update and Clip Wi according to Equation 12	#Update, Clip
12	: end for	
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
B LAYERWISE Histogram
工əab-1eəab-1C ,iəab-1寸」əab-1g -IΘ≈-B1 9 -iəab-1L -iəab-18 -iəab-1
Figure 5: Layerwise histograms of a trained VGG-like network with bitwidth configuration: 2-8-
8-8 and learning rate η equals to 8. The Y-axis represents for probability in W-plots and G-plots,
and logarithmic probability in A-plots and E-plots, respectively. In A-plots histograms are one-layer
ahead so the first figure shows the quantized input data.
14