Figure 1: Proposed Approach. (Left) We design an evaluation framework to systematically com-pare SDMs across diverse slice settings. Here, the example slice setting includes a dataset thatdisplays a strong correlation between the presence of birds and skies. (Right) A classifier trainedto detect the presence of birds makes false positive predictions on skies without birds. We presentDomino, a novel SDM that uses cross-modal embeddings to identify and describe the error slice.
Figure 2: Evaluation Framework. We propose a framework for generating slice discovery settingsfrom any base dataset with class structure or metadata.
Figure 3: Cross-modal embeddings enable accurate slice discovery. Using our evaluation frame-work, we demonstrate that the use of cross-modal embeddings leads to consistent improvements inslice discovery across three datasets and two input modalities (1,235 settings).
Figure 4: Error-aware mixture model enables accurate slice discovery. When cross-modalembeddings are provided as input, our error-aware mixture model often outperforms previously-designed SDMs. Results on medical images and medical time-series data are in Section A.5.
Figure 5: Domino produces natural language descriptions of discovered slices. Natural languagedescriptions for discovered slices in (top row) 3 settings randomly selected from the set of the 85rare slice, natural image settings where Domino includes the exact name of the slice in its top 5slice descriptions; (middle row) 3 settings randomly selected from the set of the 45 correlationslice, natural image settings where Domino includes the exact name of the slice in its top 5 slicedescriptions and precision-at-25 exceeds 0.8; and (bottom row) 3 settings randomly selected fromthe set of the 95 noisy label slice, natural image settings where Domino includes the exact nameof the slice in its top 5 slice descriptions and precision-at-25 exceeds 0.8. The length of the barsbeneath each description are proportional to the dot product score for the description (see Section5.3). Also shown are the top 3-4 images that Domino associates with the discovered slice.
Figure 6:	Domino produces natural language descriptions for discovered slices in a medicalimage dataset. Here, we provide the top five natural language descriptions for discovered slices in(top row) two rare slice settings, (middle row) two correlation slice settings, and (bottom row) twonoisy label slice settings. Colored bars represent accurate slice descriptions, and gray bars representincorrect descriptions. Note that in our medical examples, the vocabulary consists of physicianreports in the training set; since, we are unable to provide the full-text reports due to patient privacyconcerns, the figure includes relevant fragments of reports. The length of the bars beneath eachdescription are proportional to the dot product score for the description (see Section 5.3)seizuretargetageslice…25 year old healthyrareslice categoryman...
Figure 7:	Domino produces natural language explanations for discovered slices in a medicaltime-series dataset. Natural language descriptions for discovered slices in 3 of our EEG slicediscovery settings. In all three settings, the model is trained to detect seizures and underperformson the slice of young patients. The three settings span all three slice categories and in each Dominodescribes the slice with reports mentioning young age. Note that the description corpus consistsof physician reports in the training set; however, we are unable to provide the full-text reports dueto patient privacy concerns, so the table includes only relevant fragments. The bar lengths beneatheach description are proportional to the dot product score for the description (see Section 5.3)17Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022A.2 Extended Related Work: Survey of Slices in the WildSeveral recent studies have shown that machine learning models often make systematic errors oncritical data slices. In this section, we provide a survey of underperforming slices documented in theliterature.
Figure 8: Error-aware mixture model enables accurate slice discovery. We show that whencross-modal embeddings are provided as input, our error-aware mixture model often outperformspreviously-designed SDMs.
Figure 9: Descriptions of discovered slices align with the names of the ground truth slices. Here,we show the fraction of natural image settings where Domino includes the exact name of the groundtruth slice (or one of its WordNet synonyms (Fellbaum, 1998)) in the top-k slice descriptions.
