Table 1: Crafter benchmark scores. The Crafterscore is computed as the geometric mean of suc-cess rates for all 22 achievements available in theenvironment. The score prefers general agentsthat unlock a wide range of achievements overthose that unlock a small number of achieve-ments very frequently. For example, an agentthat explores many different achievements overthe course of training achieves a higher score thanone that only performs same simple tasks overan over. The score thus establishes a meaningfulmetric both for agents with and without reward.
Table A.1: Success rates on Crafter with rewards. Success rates are computed as the fraction ofepisodes during which the achievement has been unlocked at least once. It is computed across alltraining episodes within the budget of 1M environment steps. The score is the geometric mean ofsuccess rates over all achievements, as described in Section 3.3. Note that the score is computed foreach seed separately before averaging over seeds and not the other way around. Numbers within 95%of the best number in each row are highlighted in bold.
Table B.1: Success rates on Crafter without rewards. Success rates are computed as the fraction ofepisodes during which the achievement has been unlocked at least once. It is computed across alltraining episodes within the budget of 1M environment steps. The score is the geometric mean ofsuccess rates over all achievements, as described in Section 3.3. Note that the score is computed foreach seed separately before averaging over seeds and not the other way around. Numbers within 95%of the best number in each row are highlighted in bold.
Table C.1: Success rates of human experts on Crafter. The success rates of human experts arecomputed as the fraction of all 100 recorded games during which the achievement has been unlockedat least once. To compute the score analogously to the artificial agents, we randomly split the 100games into 5 groups that are treated as the different seeds. We then follow the same procedure as forthe artificial agents.
Table F.1: The action space is a flat categorical space, making Crafter easy to use. The 17 actionsenable the agent to move, collect materials, place objects, craft objects, and interact with what is infront of the player. Actions whose requirements are not satisfied have no effect.
