Table 2: AUC metric for score-based membership attacks before and after difficulty calibration. Thestandard deviation is up to 0.024 for Credit, up to 0.034 for Hep., up to 0.003 for MNIST and up to0.015 for all other datasets. Calibration (Cal.) consistently improves the AUC of attacks by a signif-icant margin, while calibration-via-forgetting (Cal.-F) sacrifices a modest amount of improvementfor better efficiency.
Table 3: Attack accuracy for score-based membership attacks before and after difficulty calibration.
Table 4: Average accuracy and AUC of the HopSkipJump label-only attack using min(n, 1000)datapoints for each of the training and heldout sets, where n is their original datasize. CIFARmodels were trained without data augmentation.
Table 5: Performance of the calibrated and target models on the train (left) and test (right) sets.
Table 6: Performance of the calibrated and target models on the train (left) and test (right) sets.
Table 7: AUC metric for score-based membership attacks before and after difficulty calibration with10 calibration models. Calibration (Cal.) consistently improves the AUC of attacks by a significantmargin, while calibration-via-forgetting (Cal.-F) sacrifices a modest amount of improvement forbetter efficiency.
Table 8: Attack accuracy for score-based membership attacks before and after difficulty calibrationwith 10 calibration models. In almost all settings, calibrated attacks are on-par with or better thantheir uncalibrated version in terms of accuracy.
Table 9: AUC results. As suggested by Song & Mittal (2021), Figure 9 shows that the entropyand modified entropy metrics are closely related to the confidence and loss scores respectively. Thisrelationship explains why the AUC results are similar to those of the confidence and loss scoresunder calibration. The Merlin and Morgan attacks were proposed to maximize positive predictivevalue (PPV) instead of accuracy, which is reflected in their results. Note that there was a largestandard deviation for the Hepatitis dataset using the Merlin and Morgan attacks ofupto 0.09 makingthe results difficult to compare. For the Morgan attack, a value close to 0.500 results from theattack identifying a small number of points with F PR = 0 and achieving the attack’s objective ofmaximizing PPV. Higher values indicate when this was not possible, and the intended behaviour wasthen improved by calibration due to the creation of a high precision region e.g. see CIFAR100(aug)and Table 11.
Table 10: Accuracy results. As suggested by Song & Mittal (2021), Figure 9 shows that the entropyand modified entropy metrics are closely related to the confidence and loss scores respectively. Thisrelationship explains why the accuracy results are similar to those of the confidence and loss scoresunder calibration. The Merlin and Morgan attacks were proposed to maximize positive predictivevalue (PPV) instead of accuracy, which is reflected in their results. Note that there was a largestandard deviation for the Hepatitis dataset using the Merlin and Morgan attacks ofupto 0.07 makingthe results difficult to compare. For the Morgan attack, a value close to 0.500 results from theattack identifying a small number of points with F PR = 0 and achieving the attack’s objective ofmaximizing PPV. Higher values indicate when this was not possible, and the intended behaviour wasthen improved by calibration due to the creation of a high precision region e.g. see CIFAR100(aug)and Table 11.
Table 11: Positive Predictive Value (PPV) results and number of points identified with FPR = 0.
