Table 1: Molecular conformer optimization for the QM9 dataset and the GEOM-Drugs dataset. The mean andmedian RMSDS (Unit A) between reference and predicted conformers are reported. The confidence interval iscalculated by inference with ten different initialization from RDKit+MMFF.⑷ denotes lower scores are better.
Table 2: SChNet (Schutt et al., 2017) model performance (MAE) on QM9 property prediction When trained andevaluated with predicted conformers instead of the reference conformers. The best performance is bolded.
Table 3: Molecular conformer generation for the GEOM-QM9 and GEOM-Drugs dataset. COVerage scorereports the percentage of reference conformers that are produced by the predicted ensemble. MISmatchingscore reports the percentage of generated conformers that can not be matched with any reference conformer.
Table S1: RMSD when training and evaluating our optimization models with random initialization instead ofRDKit+MMFF. The confidence interval is calculated from the inference with ten different initializations.
Table S2: The mean and standard deviation of the absolute errors of predicted ensemble properties. Unit: eV.
Table S3: MAE for QM9 molecular property prediction benchmark comparing to other non-equivariant (top)and equiviriant (bottom) models. The top-3 performances for each task are bolded.
Table S4: Study of Model Ablation and Variation for Molecular Graph Connectivity.
Table S5: Study of Model Ablation and Variation for Interaction Weight Parameterization. None refers to nointeraction prediction net; Per-layer v is an EGNN-like prediction net; Per-layer d and Per-block d directly takeintermediate atomic distances as inputs and perform prediction at each layer or each block separately.
Table S6: Study of Model Variation for Parameter Sharing.
Table S7: Study of Model Variation of Iterative and Parallel Update.
Table S8: Ablation Study Comparing to EGNN. Tfm-BB denotes the transformer backbone. IW denotesinteraction weight, which is marked if per-block interaction weight is adopted, otherwise per-layer interactionweight is adopted. PS denotes parameter sharing. IU denotes parallel update.
Table S9: Ablation Study in Conformation Generation. Multi-step Eval means the model is trained to learnthe part optimization process and evaluated with multiple steps to achieve the entire optimization. EGNN-bbdenotes the model uses EGNN as the backbone. Non OT-Loss means the model is trained to minimize the L2loss between the generated conformers and their closest reference conformers, instead of using the optimaltransport loss.
