Table 1: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for all differentiable DAGlearning models with AUC-PR and AUC-ROC scores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scoresfor undirected and directed edges. Best scores among all models are in bold. Second best scoresamong all models are underlined.
Table 2: Causal mechanisms learning results on all datasets with MSE score (Lower is better) on atest set i.e. ||X - X||2 where Xi = fi,θ(Ai ◦ X). Best scores among all models WhichjointIy learnthe adjacency matrix A and the causal mechanisms fψ are in bold. GT-DAG* is excluded since it isthe ideal scenario when the ground-truth A is known at training and testing time.
Table 3: Training time for all differentiable DAG learning models in seconds (Lower is better). Fastesttraining time among all models are in bold.
Table 6: Direct DAG structure learning results on synthetic datasets using differentiable samplingoptimization with AUC-PR and AUC-ROC scores (Higher is better). At each iteration, the direct MSEerror between a new sampled DAG A and the ground-truth DAG A* is used as loss. Each results isaveraged over 10 sampled graphs and 4 learning rates. Both Gumbel-Sinkhorn and Gumbel-Top-ksampling methods lead to high performance for all graph sizes and graph types.
Table 7: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for all differentiable DAGlearning models with AUC-PR and AUC-ROC scores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scoresfor undirected and directed edges. Best scores among all models are in bold. Second best scoresamong all models are underlined.
Table 8: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for all differentiable DAGlearning models with non-differentiable processing denoted with a star *. Performance are evaluatedwith the AUC-PR and AUC-ROC scores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scores for undirectedand directed edges. Best scores among all models are in bold. Second best scores among all modelsare underlined.
Table 9: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for all differentiable DAGlearning models with non-differentiable processing denoted with a star *. Performance are evaluatedwith the AUC-PR and AUC-ROC scores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scores for undirectedand directed edges. Best scores among all models are in bold. Second best scores among all modelsare underlined.
Table 10: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for VI-DP-DAG and the secondbest baseline GraN-DAG with and without non-differentiable processing. Models using additionalprocessing are denoted with a star *. Performance are evaluated with the AUC-PR and AUC-ROCscores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scores for undirected and directed edges. GraN-DAGis more dependent on additional processing steps than VI-DP-DAG to achieve high performance.
Table 11: DAG structure learning results on synthetic and real datasets for VI-DP-DAG and the secondbest baseline GraN-DAG with and without non-differentiable processing. Models using additionalprocessing are denoted with a star *. Performance are evaluated with the AUC-PR and AUC-ROCscores (Higher is better). Un- and Dir- indicate scores for undirected and directed edges. GraN-DAGis more dependent on additional processing steps than VI-DP-DAG to achieve high performance.
Table 12: Processing time in seconds of the non-differentaible PNS pre-processing, the CAM algorthmand the DAG pruning (Buhlmann et al., 2014).
