Table 1: Benchmarking on mode separated mixture of Gaussian (MG), Funnel distribution andLog GaUssian Cox Process (LGCP) for estimation log normalization constants. B and S stand forestimation bias and standard deviation among 100 rUns and A2= B2 + S2.
Table 2: KL-divergences comparison among variational approaches of generated density with targetdensity in overall atom states distribution and five multimodal torsion angles. We emphasis KL*denote the KL divergence between unnormalized distribution due to lack of ground truth normaliza-tion constants. Mean and standard deviation are conducted with five different random seeds.
Table 3: Estimation of logpθ(x) of a trainedVAE.
Table 4: Sampling and training efficiency comparison. For sampling, we measure the consumedtime for generating 2000 particles with each method for 100 times in lower dimensional data, 2-Dpoints datasets, and report average time for each method. We also include one batch training timefor AFT and PIS.
Table 5: Consumed time for one iteration of SVGD and one step in PIS in 2D points example.
Table 6: Long-run MCMC on mode separated mixture of Gaussian (MG), Funel distribution andLog Gaussian Cox Process (LGCP) for estimating log normalization constants. The suffix denotesthe total number of discrete-time steps for each method, which equals the number of layers multiplysteps per layer. We experiments 10, 20, 30, 50, 100 layers for annealing and 100 leapfrog steps perlayer. As the number of steps increases, the performance of AFT and SMC gradually improves. PISdenotes the PISRW -Grad. B and S stand for estimation bias and standard deviation among 100 runsand A2= B2 + S2 .
Table 7: AFT and SMC with slice sampler kernel. The suffix denotes the number of temperaturelevels for annealing. 1000 slicing sampling steps are used for each temperature. Though there is noannealing and only 100 steps are used, the performance of PIS is competitive.
Table 8: PIS with large number of integral step. The suffix number is the total integral steps. ForAFT-104, we use 100 annealing layers and run 100 leapfrog steps per each annealing layer.
