Table 1: Average PSNR denoising performanceand runtime of our GS denoiser on 256 × 256center-cropped images from the CBSD68 dataset,for various noise levels σ . While keeping smallruntime, GS-DRUNet slightly outperforms its un-constrained counterpart DRUNet light and outdis-tances the deep denoisers FFDNet and DnCNN.
Table 2: PSNR(dB) comparison of image deblurring methods on CBSD10 with various blur ker-nels k and noise levels ν. Best and second best results are displayed in bold and underlined.
Table 3: PSNR(dB) comparison of image super-resolution methods on CBSD10 with variousscales s, blur kernels k and noise levels ν. PNSR results are averaged over kernels at each row.
Table 4: PSNR(dB) comparison of image deblurring methods on set3C with various blur kernels kand noise levels ν. Best and second best results are displayed in bold and underlined. Similar toTable 2, for all kinds of kernels, the proposed method outperforms all competing methods at noiselevels 0.03 and 0.05 and follows DPIR at lower noise level 0.01.
Table 5: PSNR(dB) performance of the fastest method (IRCNN/DPIR/GS-PnP) for image deblur-ring on the full CBSD68 dataset with various blur kernels k and noise levels ν, in the same conditionsas Table 2. On CBSD10 (Table 2) or on CBSD68 (Table 5), we observed very similar performancegaps between the compared methods, which confirms that CBSD10 is large enough to compareaccurately the PnP methods.
Table 6: PSNR(dB) performance, evaluated on the luminance channel in YcbCr color space, ofRED and GS-PnP for image deblurring on CBSD10. Remind that our method treats the RGB imageas a whole before being evaluated on the Y channel while RED treats the Y channel independently.
Table 7: PSNR(dB) comparison of image super-resolution methods on set3C with various scales s,blur kernels k and noise levels ν. Similar to Table 3, for isotropic and anisotropic kernels, theproposed method outperforms all competing methods at noise levels 0.03 and 0.05 and followsDPIR at lower noise level 0.01.
Table 8: PSNR(dB) performance of the fastest method (IRCNN/DPIR/GS-PnP) for image super-resolution on the full CBSD68 dataset with various blur kernels k and noise levels ν, in the sameconditions as Table 3. Once again, on CBSD10 (Table 2) or on CBSD68 (Table 5), we observedvery similar performance gaps between the compared methods, which again confirms that CBSD10is large enough to compare accurately the PnP methods.
