Table 1: Main results in near-/mixture-domain tasks. In near-domain task, the “Base”/“Novel”columns report average F1-scores of the base/novel classes; the “HarmMean” columns report theiraverage harmonic mean. In mixture-domain task, the same metrics are reported w.r.t. middle-domainclasses and out-domain classes. “±” numbers denote 95% confidence interval across multiple runs.
Table 3: Results in out-domain tasks. AverageF1-ScoreS from 1000 meta-taSkS are reported.
Table 2: Ablations on covariance type.
Table C.1: The linear evaluation accuracy of FSP and CLP models. FSP means fully-supervised pre-training, while CLP denotes contrastive-learning pre-training. We train LogisticRegression modelson whole training features, and report the accuracy for whole test features. Base-Base means thenovel class is excluded when we train and test linear classifiers. Joint-Joint means the linear clas-sifiers are trained on all training features (80k samples) and then evaluated on all test features (20ksamples). The “Average” row reports the average accuracy of 9 sub-tasks (the top 9 rows).
Table D.1: Results of 10-shot setting in near-domain task and mixture-domain task. In near-domaintask, the “Base” and “Novel” columns report the average F1-score of the base/novel class respec-tively; the “HarmMean” columns report their average harmonic mean. In mixture-domain task, thesame metrics are reported w.r.t. middle-domain and out-domain novel classes. “LA” denotes latentaugmentation. The bold numbers denote the best while the underscored numbers denote the secondbest. Results in this table are in complementary to Table 1.
Table D.2: Ablation on the effect of the number of prototypes in the base dictionary. This tableshows the numerical results of Figure 3-(a).
Table D.3: Ablation on different K-Means seeds. Results of ablation tasks are reported, i.e. 300meta-tasks under 5-shot setting.
Table D.4: Comparison to δ-encoder in ablation task. δ-encoder is a supervised method. “Labelsource” column marks using unsupervised clustering labels or ground truth labels as supervision.
