Table 1: Detection accuracy for RE-AP and RE-PR on attack ensembles A1-A10, and on cleanensembles C1-C6, using the common threshold 1/2 on ET statistic. “n/a” represents “not applicable”.
Table 2: Maximum ET statistic over allclasses for classifiers with one, two, and threeattacks respectively, and a clean classifier, forCIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and STL-10.
Table 3: Details of CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10, TinyImageNet, FMNIST, MNIST datasets.
Table 4: Short hand “code” for each ensemble of attack instances based on both the BP being usedand the dataset where the associated 2-class domains are generated from. “n/a” represents “notapplicable”.
Table 5: Summary of attack configurations for instances in each of ensembles A1-A10. For eachensemble, we show the number of attacks for each instance in this ensemble. We also show, foreach ensemble, the number of samples (embedded with BP and labeled to the target class) used forpoison the training set for each attack associated with this ensemble, as well as the correspondingpoisoning rate. Poisoning rate is defined as the number of samples inserted into the training set bythe attacker divided by the total number of training samples from the target class after poisoning.
Table 6: Training details, including learning rate, batch size, number of epochs, whether or not usingtraining data augmentation, choice of optimizer (Adam D. P. Kingma (2015) or stochastic gradientdescent (SGD)), for 2-class domains generated from CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10, TinyIma-geNet, FMNIST, and MNIST, respectively.
Table 7: Average clean test accuracy (ACC, in percentage) over all classifiers being attacked, averageand minimum attack success rate (ASR, in percentage) over all attacks, for each of ensemble A1-A10of attack instances.
Table 8: Average clean test accuracy (ACC, in percentage) over the classifiers for the clean instancesin each of ensemble C1 -C6.
Table 9: Attack success rate (ASR) and clean test accuracy (ACC) for the classifiers being attacked(with one, two, and three attacks/target classes) for CIAFR-10, CIFAR-100, and STL-10, respec-tively; and ACC for the clean classifiers trained for the three domains respectively.
Table 10: Detection accuracy of ET with RE-AP on the 10 five-class domains with 1 attack, 2attacks, and no attack, compared with RED-AP (original) and RED-AP (MAD).
