Figure 1: Didactic examples. Left: task Pass. Two agents starting at the upper-left corner are onlyrewarded when both of them reach the other room through the door, which will open only when atleast one of the switches is occupied by one or more agents. Middle: Secret-Room. An extensionof Pass with 4 rooms and switches. When the switch 1 is occupied, all the three doors turn open.
Figure 2: Development of performance of our methods compared to baselines and intrinsic rewardterms of EITI, EDTI, and plusV over the training period of 9000 PPO updates segmented into threephases. ”Team Reward” shows averaged team reward gained in a episode, with a maximum of 1000.
Figure 3: Left: performance comparison between EDTI and EITI on Secret-Room over 7400 PPOupdates. Right: EITI and EDTI terms of two agents after 100, 2900, and 7400 updates.
Figure 4: Comparison of our methods against ablations for Push-Box, Island, and Large-Island.
Figure 5: Performance of intrinsic EDTI in comparison with EITI and EDTI on Pass, Secret-Room,Push-Box, and Island.
Figure 6: Left: Performance of EDTI (vi) (EDIT estimated using variational inference) comparedwith EITI and EDTI estimated using MC sampling. Others: Development of EDTI (vi) rewardsduring exploration process. Top row: EDTI (vi) rewards of agent 1; bottom row: EDTI (vi) rewardsof agent 2.
Figure 7: Task Push-Box, Island, and Large-Island0	2500	5000	7500Updates----EDTI----EITI----random----cendeccen_control----infl_MOAMulti----COMAFigure 8:	Comparison of our methods against baselines on Push-Box (left), Island (right).
Figure 8:	Comparison of our methods against baselines on Push-Box (left), Island (right).
Figure 9:	Comparison of our methods against baselines and ablations on Island in terms of theprobability of catching the beast and the averaged treasures collected in an episode.
Figure 10: Comparison of our methods against centralized single-agent exploration algorithms onPass (left), Secret-Room (middle), and Push-Box (right).
Figure 11: Visitation heatmap of RND agents on Pass of most recent 1k episodes. The brighter theyellow color, the higher the visitation frequency. Top: agent 1, bottom: agent 2.
Figure 12: Visitation heatmap in most recent 1k episodes of EMI agents on Pass. The brighter theyellow color, the higher the visitation frequency. Top: agent 1, bottom: agent 2.
