Figure 1: Relationship between the variables and functions defined in Sec. 3.1, as well as indicationof the training scheme.
Figure 2: Successful reconstruction by GIN of the two informative latent variables out of ten in total.
Figure 3: Spectrum of sorted standard deviations derived from training GIN on EMNIST. On theright is the equivalent spectrum from PCA, a linear method, on MNIST. The nonlinear spectrumexhibits a sharp knee not obtained by linear methods. In the nonlinear spectrum, the first 22 latentvariables encode information about the shape of a digit, while the rest of the latent variables encodenoise. This distinction is marked with a dotted line in the left and center figures (see Sec. 4.4.2 forexplanation of the choice of this cut-off). Within the first 22 variables, the first eight encode globalinformation, such as slant and width, whereas the following 14 encode more local information. Thisdistinction is marked in the center figure only.
Figure 4:	Selection of global latent variables found by GIN. Each row is conditioned on a differentdigit label. The variable runs from -2 to +2 standard deviations across the columns, with all othervariables held constant at their mean value. The rightmost column shows a heatmap of the imageareas most affected by the variable, computed as the absolute pixel difference between -1 and +1standard deviations. Variable 1 controls the width of the top half of a digit, whereas variable 8controls the width of the bottom half. Width in both cases is somewhat entangled with slant. Variable3 controls the height and variable 4 controls how bent the digit is. Full set of variables for all digitsin Appendix F.
Figure 5:	Selection of local latent variables found by GIN. Refer to Figure 4 above for explanationof the layout. Variable 11 controls the shape of curved lines in the middle right. Digits without suchlines are not affected. Variable 12 controls extension towards the upper right. Variable 13 modifiesthe top left of 2, 3 and 7 only (7 not shown here) and variable 16 modifies only the lower right strokeof a 2. Full set of variables for all digits in Appendix F.
Figure 6: Experiment 1: Five mixture components and 100,000 data points. GIN successfully re-constructs the generating latent space and gives importance to only two of its ten latent variables,reflecting the two-dimensional nature of the generating latent space.
Figure 7: Same experiment as in Figure 6 with the number of data points reduced to 10,000. GINfails to successfully estimate the ground truth latent variables, due to limited data: The first variable(x-axis) is well approximated in the reconstruction, but the second variable (y-axis) is split intotwo in the reconstruction, one capturing mainly information about the lower two clusters (shownhere) and another information about the other mixture components (not shown). We also observea less clear spectrum, where three variables are given more importance than the rest, not faithfullyreflecting the two-dimensional nature of the generating latent space.
Figure 8: Experiment 2: Only three mixture components (not sufficient for identifiability accordingto the theory). Nevertheless, GIN successfully reconstructs the ground truth latent variables. Thissuggests that the current theory of nonlinear ICA relies on sufficient, but not necessary, conditionsfor identifiability.
Figure 9: Full and reduced temperature samples from the model trained on EMNIST. Reduced tem-perature samples are made by sampling from a Gaussian distribution where the standard deviationis reduced by the temperature factor. The 22 most significant variables are sampled, with the otherskept to their mean value. This eliminates noise from the images but preserves the full variability ofdigit shapes. Each row has the same latent code (whitened value) but is conditioned on a differentclass in each column, hence the style of the digits is consistent across rows.
Figure 10: Most significant latent variables 1 to 4. Each row is conditioned on a different digit label.
Figure 11: Most significant latent variables 5 to 8. Each row is conditioned on a different digit label.
Figure 12: Most significant latent variables 9 to 12. Each row is conditioned on a different digit label.
Figure 13:	Most significant latent variables 13 to 16. Each row is conditioned on a different digitlabel. The variable runs from -2 to +2 standard deviations across the columns, with all other variablesheld constant at their mean value. The rightmost column shows a heatmap of the image areas mostaffected by the variable, computed as the absolute pixel difference between -1 and +1 standarddeviations.
Figure 14:	Most significant latent variables 17 to 20. Each row is conditioned on a different digitlabel. The variable runs from -2 to +2 standard deviations across the columns, with all other variablesheld constant at their mean value. The rightmost column shows a heatmap of the image areas mostaffected by the variable, computed as the absolute pixel difference between -1 and +1 standarddeviations.
Figure 15:	Most significant latent variables 21 to 24. Each row is conditioned on a different digitlabel. The variable runs from -2 to +2 standard deviations across the columns, with all other variablesheld constant at their mean value. The rightmost column shows a heatmap of the image areas mostaffected by the variable, computed as the absolute pixel difference between -1 and +1 standarddeviations.
