Figure 1: Visualization of vector field V (X) := f(X) -X induced by the one-step transition. Colormaps indicate the absolute value |V (X)| at the point X. Dotted lines are the subspace M. Left:Case 1. Right: Case 2. Best view in color.
Figure 2: The actual distances to the invariant space M and their upper bounds. Solid lines are thelog relative distance defined by y(l) = log(dM(X(l))/dM(X(0))) and dotted lines are upper boundy(l) = l log(sλ), where X(0) is the input signal and X(l) is the output of the l-th layer.
Figure 3: Node prediction results on Noisy Cora. Left: Effect of the maximum singular values onweights on model performance. The horizontal dotted line indicates the chance rate (30.2%). Theerror bar is the standard deviation of 3 trials. Right: Transition of maximum singular values duringtraining. See Appendix I.3 for results using other datasets. Best view in color.
Figure 4: log t(X ) and predictionaccuracy on Noisy Cora.
Figure 5: Spectral distribution of Laplacian for the citation network datasets. Left: normalizedLaplacian. Right: augmented normalized Laplacian. Top: Cora and Noisy Cora (2500, 5000).
Figure 6: Vector field V for various W for Case 1. Top left: W = 0.5. Top right: W = 1.0.
Figure 7: Vector field V for various W for Case 2. Top left: W = 0.5. Top right: W = 1.0.
Figure 8: The actual distance dM to the invariant space M and the upper bound inferred by Theorem1. The edge probability p takes 0.01(top), 0.1, 0.9(bottom) and the maximum singular value s takes0.1(left), 1.0,10(right). Blue lines are the log relative distance defined by y(l) := log dM(X；0))andorange dotted lines are upper bound y(l) := l log(sλ), where X(0) is the input signal and X(l) is theoutput of the l-th layer. Best view in color.
Figure 9: Effect of the maximum singular values of weights on predictive performance. Horizontaldotted lines indicate the chance rates (30.2% for Noisy Cora 5000, 21.2% for Noisy CiteSeer, and39.9% for Noisy PubMed). The error bar is the standard deviation of 3 trials. Left: Noisy Cora5000. Right: Noisy CiteSeer. Bottom: Noisy Pubmed. Best view in color.
Figure 10: Transition of maximum singular values of GCN during training using Noisy Cora 2500.
Figure 11: Transition of maximum singular values of GCN during training using Noisy Cora 5000.
Figure 12:	Transition of maximum singular values of GCN during training using Noisy CiteSeer.
Figure 13:	Transition of maximum singular values of GCN during training using Noisy PubMed.
Figure 14:	Logarithm of relative perpendicular component and prediction accuracy. Left: NoisyCiteSeer. Right: Noisy PubMed. p in the title represents the p-value for the Pearson R coefficients.
