Figure 1: Reliability metrics and median performance for continuous control RL algorithms (DDPG,TD3, SAC, REINFORCE, and PPO) tested on OpenAI Gym environments. Rank 1 always indicates"best" reliability, e.g. lowest IQR across runs. Error bars are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals(# bootstraps = 1,000). Significant pairwise differences in ranking between pairs of algorithms areindicated by black horizontal lines above the colored bars. (α = 0.05 with Benjamini-Yekutielicorrection, permutation test with # permutations = 1,000). Note that the best algorithms by medianperformance are not always the best algorithms on reliability.
Figure 2: Reliability metrics and median performance for four DQN-VariantS (C51, DQN: DeepQ-network, IQ: Implicit Quantiles, and RBW: Rainbow) tested on 60 Atari games. Rank 1 alwaysindicates "best" reliability, e.g. lowest IQR across runs. Significant pairwise differences in rankingbetween pairs of algorithms are indicated by black lines above the colored circles. (α = 0.05 withBenjamini-Yekutieli correction, permutation test with # permutations = 1,000). Note that the bestalgorithms by median performance are not always the best algorithms on reliability. Error bars are95% bootstrap confidence intervals (# bootstraps = 1,000).
Figure 3: Diagram illustrating the computation of the permutation tests for per-run metrics (Disper-sion across Time, Short-term Risk across Time, Long-term Risk across Time). In this example, Weare comparing Algorithm A and Algorithm B, and there are only 3 algorithms, 3 tasks, and 3 runsper (task, algo) pair. To compute the difference in average rankings for two algorithms, follow thegray arrows. To compute a null distribution of difference in average rankings (by permuting the runs),follow the blue arrows a number of times (e.g. 1,000 times). Once the null distribution has beencomputed, the actual value of the difference can be compared with the null distribution to obtain ap-value.
Figure 4: Diagram illustrating the computation of the permutation tests for across-run or across-rollout metrics (Dispersion across Runs, Risk Across Runs, Dispersion across Fixed-policy rollouts,Risk across Fixed-Policy rollouts). In this example, We are comparing Algorithm A and Algorithm B,and there are only 3 algorithms, 3 tasks, and 3 runs per (task, algo) pair. To compute the differencein average rankings for two algorithms, follow the gray arrows. To compute a null distribution ofdifference in average rankings (by permuting the runs), follow the blue arrows a number of times (e.g.
Figure 5: Raw training curves for OPenAI MUJoCo tasks. The x-axes indicate environment steps,and the y-axes indicate average per-episode return. Dotted lines indicate baseline performance fromthe literature, where available.
Figure 6: Across-time reliability metrics for continuous control RL algorithms tested on OpenAIGym environments, evaluated on a per-environment basis.
Figure 7: Across-run reliability metrics and median performance for continuous control RL algorithmstested on OpenAI Gym environments, evaluated on a per-environment basis. The x-axes indicate thenumber of environment steps.
Figure 8: Reliability metrics and median performance on fixed-policy rollouts for continuous controlRL algorithms tested on OpenAI Gym environments, evaluated on a per-environment basis.
Figure 9: Dispersion across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated on a Per-environment basis (page 1). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axes indicatemillions of Atari frames.
Figure 10: Dispersion across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated on aper-environment basis (page 2). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 11: Dispersion across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated on aper-environment basis (page 3). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 12: Short-term Risk across Time for DQN-variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 1). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 13: Short-term Risk across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 2). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 14: Short-term Risk across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 3). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 15: Long-term Risk across Time for DQN-variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 1). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 16: Long-term Risk across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 2). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 17: Long-term Risk across Time for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluated ona per-environment basis (page 3). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values. The x-axesindicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 18: Dispersion across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games,evaluated on a per-environment basis (page 1). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values.
Figure 19: Dispersion across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games,evaluated on a per-environment basis (page 2). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values.
Figure 20: Dispersion across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-VariantS tested on 60 Atari games,evaluated on a per-enVironment basis (page 3). Better reliability is indicated by less positive values.
Figure 21: Risk across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluatedon a per-environment basis (page 1). Better reliability is indicated by more positive values. Thex-axes indicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 22: Risk across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluatedon a per-environment basis (page 2). Better reliability is indicated by more positive values. Thex-axes indicate millions of Atari frames.
Figure 23: Risk across Fixed-policy Rollouts for DQN-Variants tested on 60 Atari games, evaluatedon a per-enVironment basis (page 3). Better reliability is indicated by more positive values. Thex-axes indicate millions of Atari frames.
