Figure 1: Cryo-EM reconstruction algorithms tackle theinverse problem of determining the 3D electron densityvolume from 104-7 noisy images. Each image is anoisy projection of a unique instance of the moleculesuspended in ice at a random orientation. Algorithmsmust jointly learn the volume and the orientation of eachparticle image. Example image from Wong et al. (2014).
Figure 2: CryoDRGN model architecture. We use a VAE to perform approximate inference for latent variableZ denoting image heterogeneity. The decoder reconstructs an image pixel by pixel given Z and pe(k), thepositional encoding of 3D Cartesian coordinates. The 3D coordinates corresponding to each image pixel areobtained by rotating a DxD lattice on the x-y plane by R, the image orientation. The latent orientation for eachimage is inferred through a branch and bound global optimization procedure (not shown).
Figure 3: a) Volumes generated at values of the latent(at dashed lines) match the published volumes of the 4major states B-E of the LSU. b) Distribution of imagesin the latent space, colored by cluster assignment from adiscrete multiclass reconstruction in cryoSPARC.
Figure 4: Left: Ground truth volume containing a continuous circular 1D motion. Middle: Reconstructedstructures from cryoDRGN match the ground truth volumes with the correct continuous deformation. Wevisualize 10 structures (superimposed) sampled at the depicted points in the latent space. The distribution ofimages in the latent space (visualized in 2D with PCA) matches the topology of the true data manifold. Right:Reconstructed volumes from discrete 3-class reconstruction in cryoSPARC and the distribution of images overthe three reconstructed volumes.
Figure S5: Left: CryoDRGN unsupervised homogeneous reconstruction on 2 simulated datasets and 1 real cryo-EM dataset matches state-of-the-art. Right: Fourier shell correlation (FSC) curves between the reconstructedvolume and the ground truth volume for the synthetic ribosome datasets.
Figure S6: Reconstructed volumes from cryoSPARC multiclass refinement using the published structures of the 6major states, low pass filtered to 25Aas initial models. Right: FSC curves between the cryoSPARC reconstructedand published volumes.
Figure S7: Left: Latent encoding for each image of the dataset from EMPIAR-10076. Bottom: Volumes from12 sampled values along the latent space (dashed lines). Right: Fourier shell correlation (FSC) curves for 4structures against the published volumes for classes B-E from corresponding to structural states of the largeribosomal subunit during assembly (Davis et al. (2016)).
Figure S8: The latent encoding aligns with cluster assignments from a successive round of multiclass refinementin cryoSPARC on the subset of images from class D and E.
Figure S9: Ground truth atomic model and the heterogeneity introduced for different datasets.
