Table 1: Average and worst-group test accuracies evaluated on image classification datasets (Water-birds, CelebA). For more rigorous comparison, we run SSA and Group DRO on 3 random seeds andreport the average and the standard deviation. Results of ERM, CVaR DRO, LfF and JTT are fromLiu et al. (2021). Results of EIIL on Waterbirds are from Creager et al. (2021). Best performances(among methods using only validation set labels) are marked in bold.
Table 2: Average and worst-group test accuracies evaluated on natural language datasets (MultiNLI,CivilComments-WILDS). For more rigorous comparison, we run SSA and Group DRO on 3 randomseeds and report the average and the standard deviation. Results of ERM, CVaR DRO, LfF and JTTare from Liu et al. (2021). Results of EIIL on CivilComments are from Creager et al. (2021). Bestperformances (among methods using only validation set labels) are marked in bold.
Table 3: Worst-group accuracy on Waterbirds and CelebA with varying group-labeled set size. Re-sults of JTT are from Liu et al. (2021).
Table 4: Group-wise accuracy (recall) of spurious attribute predictor trained in the pseudo-labelingphase, on the CelebA dataset. Worst-group accuracies are marked in bold.
Table 5: Samples statistics during the training of spurious attribute predictor on CelebA with 5% ofthe default validation set.
Table 6: Average and the worst-group accuracy of the proposed SSA algorithm, when combinedwith two different choices of supervised worst-case loss minimization algorithms. The numbers inbrackets are the gap closed by SSA between ERM and supervised robust training methods.
Table 7: Comparison of classification performance (bACC/GM) on CIFAR-10 under 4 different setsof (mmaj , nmaj , γlab), where mmaj denotes number of labeled samples in to the largest class, nmajdenotes the number of unlabeled samples in the largest class, and γlab denotes the largest-to-smallestclass ratio in the labeled set (we let γunlab = 1). The best results are indicated in bold.
Table 8: Group-wise accuracy of spurious attribute predictor in pseudo-labeling phase on CelebA.
Table 9: Group-wise accuracy of spurious attribute predictor in pseudo-labeling phase on Water-birds.
Table 10: Runtime of pseudo-labeling phase and robust training phase on the datasets we considered.
