Table 1: Ablation studies on the KITTI validation set. SF, OF, and OR denote the scene-leveldistillation in feature space, the object-level distillation in feature space, and the object-level distil-lation in result space, respectively. Besides, FF means the attention based feature fusion strategy.
Table 2: Evaluation on the KITTI validation set for detailed design choice. OF and OR representthe object-level distillation in feature space and the object-level distillation in result space.
Table 3: Comparison of state-of-the-art methods on the KITTI test set. Methods are ranked bymoderate setting. We highlight the best results in bold and the second place in underlined. OnlyRGB images are required as input in the inference phase for all listed methods. *: need dense depthmaps or LiDAR signals for training. 1: our baseline model without confidence normalization.
Table 4: Performance of the Car category on the KITTI validation set. We highlight the bestresults in bold and the second place in Underlined. 1: our baseline model without confidence nor-malization.
Table 5: Cross-model evaluation on the KITTI validation set. We extract each required item(location, dimension, orientation, and confidence) from the baseline model (B) and the full model(O), and evaluate them in a cross-model manner.
Table 6: Performance of the student model under the guidance of different teacher models.
Table 7: Comparison of using depth estimation as intermediate task or not. Setting a. and c.
Table 8: Performance of Pedestrian/Cyclist detection on the KITTI test set. We highlight thebest results in bold and the second place in underlined.
Table 9: Performance of Pedestrian/Cyclist detection on the KITTI validation set. Both 0.25and 0.5 IoU thresholds are considered. We report the mean of several experiments for the proposedmethods. ± captures the standard deviation over random seeds.
Table 10: Training samples of each category on the KITTI training set.
Table 11: Effects of stereo depth estimation. Baseline denotes the baseline model without guid-ance of teacher network. Stereo Depth and LiDAR Depth denote under the guidance of stereo depthmaps and LiDAR signals. Experiments are conducted on the KITTI validation set.
Table 12: MonoDistill on GUPNet. Experiments are conducted on the KITTI validation set.
Table 13: Effects of the resolution of LiDAR signals. Experiments are conducted on the KITTIvalidation set.
Table 14: Comparison with direct dense depth supervision. Experiments are conducted on theKITTI validation set.
