Table 1: The relationship between notations for belief state modeling for different settings.				2.3	Factored Observation Stochastic GamesA FOSG is a tuple hT, Opub, Opriv(1), . . . , Opriv(n), R1, . . . , Rni, where T: W × A → ∆W isthe transition function, Opub : W → ∆Opub is the public observation function, Opriv(i) : W →∆Opriv(i) is player i’s private observation function, and Ri : W × A → R is player i’s rewardfunction. At each time step, each agent selects an action at 〜 ∏t(st) as a function of the his-tory of its observations and actions sit = (o1pub, o1priv(i), ai1,. . . , otpub, otpriv(i)). The joint actionat = (at1 , . . . , atn) is used in conjunction with the current Markov state wt to generate a newMarkov state Wt+1 〜T(wt, a) and a reward rt = R(Wt, a) for each player. The public ob-servation Op+1 〜Opub(Wt+1) and each player,s private observation Op+iV(i)〜Opriv(i)(Wt+1)are determined as functions of the concurrent Markov state. In FOSGs the relevant belief state isthe posterior P(Wt, S1t, . . . , Snt | o1pub, π11, . . . , πn1 , . . . , otpub) over the current Markov state andeach player’s action-observation history, conditioned on the sequence of public observations and thesequence of policies. This belief state is called the public belief state.
Table 2: A graphical model depiction of the dynamic programming perspective on belief statemodeling. Gray arrows denote causal relationships; white arrows denote distributional modeling.
Table 3: Cross entropy per card with standard error for different settings, aggregated over 300 games.
Table 4: Expected returns with standard error, aggregated over 2000 games. RL Search Multi Exactis an upper bound on the performance we would hope for from BFT. RL Search Multi Seq2Seq is ourbaseline. BFT significantly outperforms the Seq2Seq model, and nearly matches the performanceof exact beliefs.
Table 5: Expected returns with standard error, aggregated over 1000 games. Multi-agent searchwith BFT significantly outperforms the multi-agent search with a Seq2Seq belief. Computing exactbeliefs is intractable in this setting.
Table 6: Cross entropy per card with standard error for different settings, aggregated over 300 games.
Table 7: Cross entropy per card with standard error for different settings, aggregated over 300 games.
Table 8: Cross entropy per card with standard error for different settings, aggregated over 300 games.
