Table 1: Hyperparameters used for the benchmark methods GS, IPR and GeomCA as well as ourDCA method in the experiments presented in Section 4. The same hyperparameter choices applyfor experiments presented in Appendix B.
Table 2: Results of assigning points in query sets Qk to fundamental components Gf ∈ F.
Table 3: Number of representations corresponding to each class ci contained in the training DfR (toprow) and test DfE (middle row) datasets. The bottom row shows the size of the sets Et used in themode truncation experiment.
Table 4: The percentage of points in R ∪ E6 contributing to the majority-vote labelling of eachfundamental component Gf ∈ F (GDD (R ∪ E6), ηc = 0.75, ηq = 0.45) (shown in rows) whenvarying mcs (columns). The majority vote label ci of each Gf is shown in square brackets [ci]. Thebottom rows show the total percentage of points from R ∪ E6 that contributed to the majority-votelabelling (row included) and that were excluded from fundamental components F (row excluded).
Table 5: DCA ablation results obtained when varying mcs in experiment Ab-1) (top rows), spherecoverage parameter B in Ab-2) (middle rows) and number of sampled rays T in Ab-3) (bottomrows). For each experiment Ab-i), we report in columns the obtained precision P , recall R, networkquality q(G), percentage of edges normalized by the maximum number obtained per experiment Ab-i) (with maximum absolute value shown in square brackets) and lastly, the number of fundamentalcomponents |F|.
Table 6: Empirical runtime of the main components of our DCA algorithm obtained when varyingmcs in experiment Ab-1) (top rows), sphere coverage parameter B in Ab-2) (middle rows) and num-ber of sampled rays T in Ab-3) (bottom rows). For each experiment Ab-i), we report the elapsedtime normalized by the total elapsed time per experiment of the following implementation parts: ap-proximation of the Delaunay graph GD (column approx. GD), filtration of GD using sphere coverageparameter B (filter GD), distillation of GD into the distilled Delaunay graph GDD (distill GDD) andanalysis of connected components obtained in GDD (analyse GDD). For columns distill GDD andanalyse GDD in Ab-3), we additionally report in square brackets the actual elapsed time to alleviatethe effects of the large normalization constant. Finally, we report the total time elapsed in seconds(total) for each experiment in Ab-i).
Table 7: The mean and the standard deviation of the lengths of homogeneous edges among pointsin R and among points in E per truncation level ψ .
Table 8: DCA ablation results for StyleGAN obtained when varying mcs in experiment Ab-1) (toprows), sphere coverage parameter B in Ab-2) (middle rows) and number of sampled rays T in Ab-3) (bottom rows) as described in Section B.2. For each experiment Ab-i), we report in columnsthe obtained precision P, recall R, network quality q(G), percentage of edges normalized by themaximum number obtained per experiment Ab-i) (with maximum absolute value shown in squarebrackets).
Table 9: DCA scores (top row) obtained on VGG16 representations of ImageNet images from ver-sion 1 (kitchen utilities vs dogs) and version 2 (random) compared with GeomCA scores (bottomrow). For each method, we report in columns network consistency c(G), network quality q(G), pre-cision P, recall R, the relative size |G0 |rV of the largest component normalized by the total numberof points in R ∪ E and lastly, the total number of non-trivial connected components (# non-trivial).
