Table 1: Summary of data in train and test sets of TUSZ v1.5.2. used in our study.
Table 2: Seizure detection and seizure classification results. Mean and standard deviations are fromfive random runs. Best non-pretrained and pre-trained mean results are highlighted in bold.
Table 3: Comparison between DCRNNs (w/o pre-training) and existing CNNs on seizure classifica-tion. Mean and standard deviations are from five random runs. Best mean results are in bold.
Table 4: Seizure detection and classification results from DCRNNs (without self-supervised pre-training) on time-domain inputs and frequency-domain inputs. Mean and standard deviations areobtained from five random runs.
Table 5: Number of EEG clips and patients in the train, validation, and test sets in our study. Train,validation, and test sets consist of distinct patients.
Table 6: Additional evaluation scores for seizure detection on (a) 12-s EEG clips and (b) 60-s EEGclips. Mean and standard deviations are obtained from five random runs. Best non-pretrained andpre-trained mean results are highlighted in bold.
Table 7: Summary of in-house dataset. Only annotations for the start of seizure are available. ForEEG files with seizures, EEG clips are obtained by taking 12-s (or 60-s) signals starting from theannotated seizure start time. For EEG files without seizures, EEG clips are obtained by taking 12-s (or 60-s) signals randomly from the entire signal. We apply the same data preprocessing stepsdescribed in Appendix A.
Table 8: Comparison of results between self-supervised pre-training and transfer learning pre-trained on an in-house dataset. 3rd-4th rows: DCRNN results with self-supervised (SS) pre-trainingon the in-house dataset. 5th-6th rows: DCRNN results with transfer learning pre-trained for seizuredetection on the in-house dataset. Mean and standard deviations are from five random runs. Bestmean results for each column are highlighted in bold.
Table 9: Results (weighted F1-scores) of seizure classification on original 8 seizure types in TUSZ.
Table 10: Seizure detection results for DCRNNs with self-supervised pre-training (same as Table 2)and auxiliary learning. Mean and standard deviations are from five random runs. Best mean resultsfor Dist-DCRNN/Corr-DCRNN are in bold.
