Table 1: Results on CIFAR-10, one-trigger cases. CIFAR-10’s ACC is sensitive to fine-tuning and I-BAU; wecompare I-BAU when it drops similar ACCs amount to the most effective method. × - no detected trigger.
Table 2: Results on GTSRB, one-trigger cases. I-BAU’s results shown here were obtained after 100 rounds ofI-BAU. For that, Neural Cleanse, Deppinspect, and TABOR are from the same line of work, so we here onlycompare the result with the most state-of-art method in this category, TABOR.
Table 3: Results for 7-trigger-7-target cases. × marks no trigger was detected. *Here, ASR results on CIFAR-10 are provided when the model attained an ACC similar to that of NAD (the only effective one on CIFAR-10).
Table 4: Results on CIFAR-10 (Trojan WM) with different poison ratios. × marks no trigger was detected.
Table 5: Results with different # of clean data on CIFAR-10 (Trojan WM).
Table 6: Average time for de-fenses to be effective on one-trigger-one-target cases.
Table 7: Empirical Error Gap with different widths (W) of the neuron networks. Each network is adopted andtrained from scratch for 50 epochs and achieves the same level of ASR (99.48 ± 0.5%). We obtained the ErrorGap using the original poisoning trigger (Trojan WM) after the model was defended by I-BAU and reported theresults from an average of 5 runs.
Table 8: Empirical Error Gap with different numbers of available clean samples. We adopted the poisonedResNet-18 from Table 7 for this experiment. We obtained the Error Gaps using I-BAU defended models withdifferent clean samples and reported the results from the average of 5 runs.
Table 9: The target model details. The simplifiedVGG model contains three simplified VGG blocks,of which each contains two convolutional layers ineach block. Here, we report the size of each layer.
Table 10: Empirical evaluation on I-BAU’s effectiveness towards semantical replacement as backdoor attack.
Table 11: Empirical evaluation on I-BAU’s effectiveness towards WaNet.
Table 12: Empirical evaluation on I-BAU’s effectiveness towards the IAB attack.
