Table 1: Mean Absolute estimation Error (MAE) results for different datasets in our setup grouped bythe nature of shift. ‘Same’ refers to same subpopulation shifts and ‘Novel’ refers novel subpopulationshifts. We include details about the target sets considered in each shift in Table 2. Post T denotes useof TS calibration on source. Across all datasets, we observe that ATC achieves superior performance(lower MAE is better). For language datasets, we use DistilBERT-base-uncased, for vision dataset wereport results with DenseNet model with the exception of MNIST where we use FCN. We includeresults on other architectures in App. H. For GDE post T and pre T estimates match since TS doesn’talter the argmax prediction. Results reported by aggregating MAE numbers over 4 different seeds.
Table 2: Details of the test datasets considered in our evaluation.
Table 5: Mean Absolute estimation Error (MAE) results for BREEDs datasets with novel populationsin our setup. After fitting a robust linear model for DOC on same subpopulation, we show predictedaccuracy on different subpopulations with fine-tuned DOC (i.e., DOC (w/ fit)) and compare withATC without any regression model, i.e., ATC (w/o fit). While observe substantial improvements inMAE from DOC (w/o fit) to DOC (w/ fit), ATC (w/o fit) continues to outperform even DOC (w/ fit).
Table 3: Mean Absolute estimation Error (MAE) results for different datasets in our setup grouped bythe nature of shift. ‘Same’ refers to same subpopulation shifts and ‘Novel’ refers novel subpopulationshifts. We include details about the target sets considered in each shift in Table 2. Post T denotesuse of TS calibration on source. For language datasets, we use DistilBERT-base-uncased, for visiondataset we report results with DenseNet model with the exception of MNIST where we use FCN.
Table 4: Mean Absolute estimation Error (MAE) results for different datasets in our setup groupedby the nature of shift for ResNet model. ‘Same’ refers to same subpopulation shifts and ‘Novel’ refersnovel subpopulation shifts. We include details about the target sets considered in each shift in Table 2.
