Table 1: Results on unconditional IGMs where real data is sampled from ImageNet1000 and is distributed asX 〜Tx(D), and generated data is sampled from BigBiGAN and distributed as X 〜Tx(G(TZ(Z))). Tz =—indicates that no transformation is applied. For the Contrastive objective, positive and negative views aredefined as described in Sec. 3.2.1 (without using class labels).
Table 2: Results on unconditional IGMs where generated data is sampled from StyleGAN2 LSUN CAR anddistributed as X 〜Tx(G(TZ(z))). TZ = — indicates that no transformation is applied. For the COntrastiVeobjective, positive and negative views are defined as described in Sec. 3.2.1 (without using class labels).
Table 3: Results on class-conditional IGMs. Real data is sampled from ImageNet1000 and distributed asX 〜Tx(D). Generated data is sampled from BigGAN and distributed as X 〜Tx(G(Tz(Z),y)). TZ,Tx = —indicates that no transformation is applied. Tz = pz indicates that the transformation draws a new sample pz ,independent of the original z. For the Sup. Contrastive objective, positives are defined following App. C.1.1,where two views are treated as positive if and only if they share the same label y .
Table 4: Results on unconditional IGMs. Real data is sampled from ImageNet1000 and distributed as X 〜Tx(D). Generated data is sampled from BigBiGAN and distributed as X 〜Tx(G(Tz(Zy)) Tz = — indicatesthat no transformation is applied. For the Contrastive objective, positive and negative views are defined asdescribed in Sec. 3.2.1 (without using class labels).
Table 5: Results on class-conditional IGMs. Real data is sampled from ImageNet1000 and distributed asx 〜Tx(D). Generated data is sampled from BigGAN and distributed as X 〜Tx(G(Tz(Z),y)). Tz,Tx = —indicates that no transformation is applied. Tz = pz indicates that the transformation draws a new sample pz ,independent of the original Z. For the Sup. Contrastive objective, positives are defined following Sec. C.1.1,where two views are treated as positive if and only if they share the same label y .
Table 6: Results on class-conditional IGMs. Real data is sampled from ImageNet1000 and distributed asX 〜 Tx(D). Generated data is sampled from BigGAN and distributed as X 〜 Tx(G(ζ, y)). We reportthe performance on real data and synthetic data with no latent transforms, for the Supervised Contrastive andClassifier objectives.
