Table 1: Detection performance of four detectors with and without Hindsight on the LyftDataset. We break down APBEV by depth ranges. “+ H” stands for methods with point cloudsendowed with history features by HINDSIght['Δ APBEV” indicates the absolute gain. Hindsightimproves the baselines in all but one case; on several challenging cases (i.e., far-away objects orpedestrians and cyclists), the exact gains are larger than 20% in AP. Corresponding AP3D results andresults under other IoU metrics are included in Appendix A where we observe a similar trend.
Table 2: Detection performance of two detectors with and without Hindsight on the nuScenesDataset. Please refer to Table 1 for naming. HINDSIGHT improves the baselines in all but one case;the gain is more pronounced on the challenging pedestrian objects.
Table 3: Detection performance with various quantization sizes with PointRCNN. We showAPBEV / AP3D evaluated in 0-80m. “H-δ m" stands for Hindsight with quantization size δ m. Wealso report the average SQuaSH storage size and the average latency of querying the SQuaSH perscene under different quantization sizes.
Table 4:	Detection performance of differentHindsight spatial featurizer with PointR-CNN. We show APBEV / AP3D evaluated in 0-80m. “+H (x)” stands for Hindsight with spa-tial featurizer x.
Table 5:	Detection performance with vari-ous number of available past traversals withPointRCNN. We show APBEV / AP3D evaluatedin 0-80m. “+H (≤ x) ” stands for Hindsightwith using ≤ x past traversals.
Table 6: Detection performance with simu-lated localization error with PointRCNN. Weshow APBEV / AP3D evaluated in 0-80m. “H∆σ m” means adding a random localization er-ror of a standard deviation σ m in evaluation.
Table 7: Hindsight detection results in the Lyft dataset, in APBEV with IoU=0.5 for car objectsand IoU=0.25 for pedestrian and cyclist objects.
Table 8: Hindsight detection results in the Lyft dataset, in AP3D with IoU=0.7 for car objects andIoU=0.5 for pedestrian and cyclist objects.
Table 9: Hindsight detection results in the Lyft dataset, in AP3D with IoU=0.5 for car objects andIoU=0.25 for pedestrian and cyclist objects.
Table 10: Hindsight detection results in the nuScenes dataset, in APBEV with IoU=0.5 for carobjects and IoU=0.25 for pedestrian objects.
Table 11: Hindsight detection results in the nuScenes dataset, in AP3D with IoU=0.7 for carobjects and IoU=0.5 for pedestrian objects.
Table 12: Hindsight detection results in the nuScenes dataset, in AP3D with IoU=0.5 for carobjects and IoU=0.25 for pedestrian objects.
Table 13: Detection performance using SQuaSH pre-computed at various distance from thecurrent ego car pose. We use base detector PointRCNN and report APBEV with IoU=0.7 for carobjects and IoU=0.5 for pedestrian and cyclist objects. We do not observe significant performancedifference among using SQuaSH with 0 - 5 m offset.
Table 14: Detection performance with simu-lated bearing error with PointRCNN. We showAPBEV /AP3D evaluated in 0-80m. "H ∆σ^”means adding a random bearing error of a stan-dard deviation σ° in evaluation.
Table 15: Detection performance with variousquantization sizes with PointRCNN. We showAPBEV / AP3D evaluated in 0-80m. Please referto Table 3 for naming. We show the evaluationunder Car: IoU 0.5, Ped & Cyc: IoU 0.25.
