Table 1: Marginal predictive performance on Argoverse motion prediction. Results reported ontest split for vehicles (Chang et al., 2019). minADE, minFDE reported for k = 6 predictions (Alahiet al., 2016; Pellegrini et al., 2009); Miss Rate (MR) (Chang et al., 2019) within 2 meters of the target.
Table 2: Marginal predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion prediction.
Table 3: Joint predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion prediction.
Table 4: WOMD validation set performance with and without data augmentation during training.
Table 5: Scene Transformer architecture and training details. The network receives as input ofA agents across T time steps and K features. K is the total number of input features (e.g. 3-Dposition, velocity, object type, bounding box size). A subset of these inputs are masked. GS and GDis the maximum number of road graph (RG) elements and D is the total number of features. MLP andBN denote multilayer perception and batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), respectively. Theoutput of the network is Z1 and Z2. Z1 corresponds to predicting the logits for classifying which oneof the F futures is most likely. Z2 corresponds to the predicted xyz-coordinates with their associateduncertainties, and a single value for heading. In our model D = 256, K = 7 and F = 6 for a total of15,296,136 parameters for both datasets. For the Waymo Open Motion Dataset Gs = 1400, Gd = 16,T = 91, A = 128, and for Argoverse Gs = 256, Gd = 0, T = 50, and A = 64. All layers employReLU nonlinearities.
Table 6: Transformer architecture. The network receives as input Xo and outputs Z. All MLP’semploy a ReLU nonlinearity. D is the number of feature dimensions; H is the number of attentionheads. In our model D=256, H=4 and k=4.
Table 7: Marginal predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion predictionfor t = 3 seconds. Please see Table 2 for details.
Table 8: Joint predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion prediction fort = 3 seconds. Please see Table 3 for details.
Table 9: Marginal predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion predictionfor t = 5 seconds. Please see Table 2 for details.
Table 10: Joint predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion prediction fort = 5 seconds. Please see Table 3 for details.
Table 11: Marginal predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion predictionfor t = 8 seconds. Please see Table 2 for details. We additionally include "joint-as-marginal" resultsfor our standard MP masked joint model, and our multi-task joint model. These are joint modelsevaluated as if they were marginal models (with no changes in the outputs).
Table 12: Joint predictive performance on Waymo Open Motion Dataset motion prediction fort = 8 seconds. These results are the same as Table 3 but is included here for completeness with theother Appendix tables.
