Table 1: Comparisons to DatasetGAN on Car-20, Cat-16, Face-34. The performance is evaluatedwith mIoU(%). TL: transfer learning. SSL: semi-supervised learning. f: Results taken from Zhanget al. (2021). ∣: Up-to-date performance from DatasetGAN github repository. ]: Results obtained byourselves using DatasetGAN source codes.
Table 2: Ablation study w.r.t. blocks for matching gradients. Evaluation is performed on Cat-16,where StyleGAN2 is the generator and DeepLabv3 is the segmentation network. “Time / step” ismeasured as the ratio with respect to the default setting. * denotes the default setting.
Table A.1: Left: Protocol for merging part classes on CelebA. Right: Dataset split on CelebA.
Table A.2: Protocol for merging part classes on Pascal Part.
Table A.3: Protocol for merging part classes on CGPart.
Table B.4: Pretrained GANs. We use the source codes provided by Karras et al. (2020a) to train Style-GAN models: https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan2-ada-pytorch. For CelebAand Face-34 the StyleGAN-ADA is trained on CelebAHQ-Mask 28k images at 256 × 256 and512 × 512 resolution, respectively. For Pascal-Aeroplane, the StyleGAN2 is trained on 200k imagesfrom LSUN airplane.
Table C.5: Comparison of our methods to inversion method.
Table C.6: Comparison of our methods to pseudo-labeling method.
Table C.7: Comparisons of our methods using gradient matching (GM) versus MAML on Car-20,Cat-16, Face-34 with different network architectures. The performance is evaluated with meanintersection over union (mIoU(%)) across all part classes plus a background class.
Table C.8: Ablation study w.r.t. blocks for matching gradients on U-Net. Evaluation is performedon Cat-16, where StyleGAN2 is the generator. “Time / step” is measured as the ratio to the case ofdefault setting. * denotes the default setting.
Table C.9: Comparisons of the training efficiency (time / step) and downstream segmentation (U-Net)performance (mIoU (%)) w.r.t. different input resolution to segmentation network on Face-34. “Time/ step” is measured as ratio with respect to the default setting. * denotes the default setting.
