Table 1: Results on Colored MNIST dataset for the task of two versus four digits classification with abinary protected attribute (purple, green). We consider the scenarios of learning with partial outcomes(30 repeats) and missing demographic (30 repeats). The fairness measures are: the ratio of acceptancerates (AR ratio), true positive rates (TPR ratio), and true negative rates (TNR ratio) between the twodemographics, respectively (the closer to one the fairer).
Table 2: Results on Colored MNIST dataset for a 3-digits-3-colors task, i.e. classification of the digitstwo versus four vs six with a protected attribute that can take three values (purple, green, blue). Weconsider the scenario of learning with partial outcomes with four sources missing (30 repeats). Thefairness measures are: the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Renyi correlation (the lower the better), the mean ofthe pairwise ratio of acceptance rates (AR ratio mean), true positive rates (TPR ratio mean), and truenegative rates (TNR ratio mean) across all pairwise combinations (the closer to one the fairer).
Table 3: Results on the Adult Income dataset for the binary classification task of predicting whetheran individual earns >$50,000 with a binary protected attribute gender (30 repeats). We consider twoscenarios: one where an entire demographic is missing (females are missing from the training set)and one where we only partially observe outcomes for one of the demographics (all females earn lessthan $50,000). The fairness measures are: AR (Acceptance Rate) ratio, TPR (True Positive Rate)ratio, and TNR (True Negative Rate) ratio.
Table 4: Biasing parameters for the training (left) and context (right) sets of Colored MNIST in thepartial outcomes setting.
Table 5: Biasing parameters for the training (left) and context (right) sets of Colored MNIST in theinvisible demographics setting.
Table 6: Hyperparameters used for Colored MNIST and Adult dataset experiments.
Table 7: Results on Colored MNIST dataset for a 3-digits-3-colors task, i.e. classification of thedigits two versus four vs six with a protected attribute that can take three values (purple, green, blue).
