Table 1: Results on CMNIST, a digit classification task where color is a spurious feature correlatedwith the label during training but anti-correlated at test time. Our method Environment Inferencefor Invariant Learning (EIIL), taking inspiration from recent themes in the fairness literature,augments IRM to improve test set performance without knowledge of pre-specified environmentlabels, by instead finding worst-case environments using aggregated data and a reference classifier.
Table 2: Domain Generalization (Dom-Gen) and Fairness methods can be understood as matchingsome statistic across conditioning variable e, representing “environment” or “domains” in Dom-Genliterature and “sensitive” group membership in the Fairness literature. We boldface new connectionshighlighted in this work, with blank spaces suggesting future work.
Table 3: Accuracy on ConfoundedAdult, a variant of the UCI Adult dataset where some sensitivesubgroups correlate to the label at train time and reverse this correlation pattern at test time.
Table 4: ConfoundedAdult is a variant of the UCI Adult dataset that emphasizes test-time distrbu-tion shift.
Table 5: IRM using EIIL-discovered environments (eEIIL) outperforms IRM in a synthetic regres-sion setting without the need for hand-crafted environments (eHC). This is because the reference∙-vrepresentation Φ = ΦERM uses the spurious feature for prediction. MSE + standard deviation across5 runs reported.
Table 6: Accuracy across ten runs with label noise θy = 0.25 GRAYSCALE hard codes out the colorfeature and thus represents an oracle solution to CMNiST.
Table 7: We measure performance on CMNiST of various alternative approaches to optimizing theEIIL objective, ultimately concluding that none of the alternatives out-performs the method studiedin Section 4. See text for details17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021Train accs Test accsEnLvI	68.7	± 1.7	79.8	±	1.1EIILv1 (no regularizer)	78.6	± 2.0	69.2	±	2.8IRM (random environments)	94.7	± 0.1	17.6	±	1.6Table 8: Our ablation study shows that both ingredients of EIILv1 (finding worst-case environmentsand regularizing invariance across them) are required to achieve good test-time performance on theConfoundedAdult dataset.
Table 8: Our ablation study shows that both ingredients of EIILv1 (finding worst-case environmentsand regularizing invariance across them) are required to achieve good test-time performance on theConfoundedAdult dataset.
