Table 2: The results of link prediction tasks measured in AUC (%). The best results and the second-best results for each dataset, respectively, are in bold and underlined.
Table 1: The results of link prediction on thePPA dataset. The best result and the second-bestresult are in bold and underlined, respectively.
Table 3: The results of node classification tasks measured by accuracy (%). The best results and thesecond-best results for each dataset, respectively, are in bold and underlined.
Table 4: The ablation study of different SMP variants for the link prediction task. Datasets exceptPPA are measured by AUC (%) and PPA is measured by Hits@100. The best results and the second-best results for each dataset are in bold and underlined, respectively.
Table 5: The average running time (in milliseconds) for each epoch (including both training andtesting), on link prediction task.
Table 6: The results of graph reconstruction measured in AUC (%). The best and the second-bestresults for each dataset, respectively, are in bold and underlined. OOM represents out of memory.
Table 7: The results of pairwise node classification tasks measured in AUC (%). The best resultsand the second-best results for each dataset, respectively, are in bold and underlined.
Table 8: The results of comparing SMP with using one-hot IDs in GCNs. OOM represents out ofmemory. — represents the task is unavailable.
Table 9: The results of the link prediction task measured in AUC (%). The best results and thesecond-best results for each dataset, respectively, are in bold and underlined.
Table 10: The ablation study of different SMP variants for the node classification task. The bestresults and the second-best results are in bold and underlined, respectively.
Table 11: The ablation study of different SMP variants for the pairwise node classification task. Thebest results and the second-best results are in bold and underlined, respectively.
Table 12: The results of comparing whether the stochastic signals E are fixed or not during differenttraining epochs for the link prediction task. The better of the two results are in bold.
Table 13: The results of SGC, GCN, and GAT for the link prediction task. Both the training accura-cies and the testing accuracies are reported.
Table 14: The statistics of the datasets. For datasets with more than one graph, #Nodes and #Edgesare summed over all the graphs and the experiments are conducted in an inductive setting.
