Table 1: Evaluation under white-box attack on VOC with the mean value of mIoU reported. “No De-fense” means normal training without adversarial samples. “clean” means mIoU on clean samples.
Table 2: Evaluation under black-box attack on VOC. Symbolic representations are same as Table 1.
Table 3: Evaluation of our method and the baseline under white-box attack on Cityscapes. Symbolicrepresentations are same as Table 1.
Table 4: Evaluation of our method and the baseline under black-box attack on Cityscapes. Symbolicrepresentations are same as Table 1.
Table 5: The architecture and initial learning rate of the model (PSPNet/DeepLabv3) for the methodwith no defense and SAT. The visual illustration can be seen from Fig. 4 and 5. “Base LR” denotesinitial learning rate of different modules.
Table 6: The architecture and initial learning rate of the model (PSPNet/DeepLabv3), which is employed in DDC-AT. “Base LR” denotes initial learning rate of different modules. “BN” means Batch Normalization.			Module Name			Base LRShared Backbone			ReSNet			0.01PPM/ASPP			0.01 × 10Main branch	Auxiliary branch	Mask branch	Convolution	Convolution	Convolution	0.01 × 10BN	BN	BN	0.01 × 10ReLU	ReLU	ReLU 一	Convolution	Convolution	Convolution	0.01 × 10Details of Model Structures The model structures for the method with no defense, which arePSPNet (Zhao et al., 2017) and DeepLabv3 (Chen et al., 2017) here, are shown in Table 5. Differ-ent modules in corresponding models have different initial learning rates. Meanwhile, the modelstructure of SAT is the same as the model trained with no defense. On the other hand, we add ex-tra segmentation branches to target models in DDC-AT during training. One important problem iswhere to set main branch, auxiliary branch and mask branch. In DDC-AT, these three branches areseparated from the same location for both VOC and Cityscapes: for PSPNet, they are separated afterthe PPM module; for DeepLabv3, they are separated after the ASPP module. Thus, the structuresfor PSPNet and DeepLabv3 in DDC-AT are shown as Table 6. Moreover, note that the split point isclose to the output of network, which is convenient to choose for models with other structures.
Table 7: Evaluation under white-box attack as well as black-box attack on the datasets of VOCand Cityscapes, which reports the standard deviation value of mIoU. Symbolic representation is thesame as that of Table 1.
Table 8: Performance comparison of defense setting in ablation study on VOC. Symbolic represen-tation is the same as that of Table 1. We record the mean value (“Mean”) and standard deviation(“Std”) of results through several repeated training process.
Table 9: The evluation of our method and the baseline on white-box/black-box attack, experimentsare executed on the dataset of VOC/Cityscapes. We report the mIoU for different defense methodswith various model structures. Especially, we record the mean value (“Mean”) and standard de-viation (“Std”) of results through several repeated training process. The bold indicates the higherperformance between SAT and DDC-AT. Symbolic representation is the same as that of Table 1.
