Table 1: Qualitative examples from the output of CTRLsum. Left column shoWs source or the generic reference summary. KeyWords are bolded. “[]” denote that the tokens are used as both keyWords and prompts.		Source or Reference	Control Aspect	Keywords (bolded) or Prompts and Model OutputSource: Hundreds of additional Iraqi troops are being sent to reinforce colleagues Who are trying to fend off ISIS’ attempt to overrun Iraq’s largest oil refinery, a key paramilitary force said Tuesday. The reinforcements come four days after ISIS began attacking northern Iraq’s Baiji oil refinery, a key strategic resource that has long been a target because the facility refines much of the fuel used by Iraqis domestically. The additional troops came from Camp Speicher, a fortified Iraqi base near the city of Tikrit, according to the media office of the Hasd Al- Shaabi militia. The reinforcements include tWo federal police regiments, an Iraqi military quick reaction force battalion and a regiment from Hasd Al-Shaabi. [ignoring	Entity	ISIS - The reinforcements come four days after ISIS began attacking Baiji oil refinery. Hasd Al-Shaabi - The reinforcements come from Camp Speicher, a fortified Iraqi base near Tikrit. They include tWo federal police regiments, an Iraqi military quick reaction force battalion and a regiment from Hasd Al-Shaabi.
Table 2: Summarization performance with oracle entity or length signals from the reference summary. “CTRL-sum (automatic)” represents our model using automatic keywords in an uncontrolled setting. LengthCode is alength-control baseline. Both BART and LengthCode numbers are from our runs.
Table 3: Entity control results on CNNDM. Success rate is the fraction of decoded summaries that actuallymention the given entity, while factual correctness is the fraction of summaries that are judged as factually correctby human annotators. The BART numbers are in terms of unconstrained generated summaries. EntityCodenumbers are directly from (Fan et al., 2018), which is obtained with a weaker convolutional seq2seq architectureand requires entity annotations at training time.
Table 4: Length control performance. MAD measuresthe deviation of output length from reference length,while PCC represents the correlation between givenlength signal and the actual output length.
Table 5: F1 scores on the dev set of NewsQA andSQuAD. GPT2 results are from our runs. The BARTbaseline and GPT2 use prompts while CTRLsum usethe same trigger as both keywords and prompts.
Table 6: Summarization performance on contributions of papers and purpose of inventions. The BART baselineuses prompts while CTRLsum use the same trigger as both keywords and prompts.
Table 7: Uncontrolled summarization performance. Automatic keywords are from the sequence tagger, whileoracle keywords are obtained utilizing the gold summaries. We report the oracle performance for a referencepoint. The BART results are from our runs. BS denotes BERTScore.
Table 8: Human evaluation scores (scale 1-5, higher is better) on entity control and purpose control experiments.
Table 9: Human evaluation scores (scale 1-5, higher is better) of uncontrolled summarization performance.
Table 10: Entity control results on CNNDM. Success rate is the fraction of decoded summaries that actuallymention the given entity.
Table 11: Ablation analysis on the role of keyword and prompt respectively. Entity success rate refers to the fullarticle entity success rate.
Table 12: ROUGE-2 scores of uncontrolled summarization on the validation set with different keywordsextraction hyperparameters.
Table 13:	Random Entity Control ExamplesArticleAmericans on the United States’ no-fly list will now be privy to information about why they have been bannedfrom commercial flights and be given the opportunity to dispute their status, according to court documents filedby the Justice Department this week. The revised policy comes in response to a June ruling by a federal judgethat said the old process was in violation of the Fifth Amendment’s guarantee of due process. The decisionwas part of an American Civil Liberties Union lawsuit brought on behalf of 13 Americans on the list. But theACLU isn’t satisfied with the government’s new policy, outlined in documents filed Monday in federal courts inOregon (PDF) and Virginia (PDF). "After years of fighting in court for complete secrecy and losing, it’s goodthat the government is finally now going to tell people of their status on the No Fly List," said Hina Shamsi,director of the ACLU National Security Project and the lead attorney on the case, in a statement. "Unfortunately,we’ve found that the government’s new redress process falls far short of constitutional requirements because itdenies our clients meaningful notice, evidence, and a hearing. The government had an opportunity to come upwith a fair process but failed, so we’re challenging it in court again." People on the no-fly list, managed by theFBI’s Terrorist Screening Center, are prohibited from boarding a commercial flight for travel into or out of theUnited States. The number of people on the list is classified. An official with knowledge of the government’sfigures told CNN in 2012 that the list contained about 21,000 names, including about 500 Americans. Beforethe change, American citizens and permanent residents who inquired with the government about being deniedaircraft boarding received a letter that neither confirmed nor denied their inclusion on the no-fly list. Now, they’llbe made aware of their status if they apply for redress, with an option to request further information. "The U.S.
Table 14:	Random Entity Control ExamplesArticleReferenceSummaryCTRLsumPoint guard Stephen Curry nearly single-handedly outscored New Orleans with 11 first-quarter points as theWarriors built a 15-point lead and rolled to victory in Game One of their Western Conference first-round series.
Table 15:	Random Entity Control ExamplesArticleIt’s the ultimate treat for Benedict Cumberbatch fans and stands an imposing 6ft tall - just like the man himself.
Table 16:	Random Paired Entity Control ExamplesA former U.S. Army enlistee who posted on Facebook about "the adrenaline rush" of dying in jihad was arrestedFriday and charged with trying to detonate a car bomb at Fort Riley military base in Kansas, authorities said.
Table 17:	Random Paired Entity Control ExamplesArticleReferenceSummaryAnder Herrera has caught the eye in recent weeks after cementing a spot in Manchester United’s starting line-upbut it appears he does not actually have a clear sight at goal. Herrera netted a brace against Aston Villa onSaturday afternoon without actually looking at Brad Guzan’s goal as his eyes appeared to be shut when makingcontact with the ball. In fact, six of Herrera’s seven goals have been scored without him even having to glimpseat either the ball or the opposition’s net. . Manchester United star Ander Herrera scores his side’s opening goalagainst Aston Villa with his eyes shut. The Spanish midfielder appears to have his eyes closed as he strikes atBrad Guzan’s goal . Aston Villa and England midfielder Fabian Delph attempts to block Herrera’s left-footedshot. His eyes were wide open when he struck an impressive first-time shot against Yeovil in the third roundof the FA Cup back in January. . However his double against Aston Villa and his goals against Queens ParkRangers, Leicester, Preston and Swansea all came without Manchester United’s summer signing having to makeeye contact with the ball. Herrera appears to have a history of shooting with his eyes closed as the image of hisgoal for Spain’s Under 20 side back in 2009 shows. Herrera hits the back of the net while representing Spain’sUnder 20 side against Tahiti . The former Athletic Bilbao joined the Red Devils for £29million in the summerdue to his vision and creativity in midfield. . Louis van Gaal heaped praise on the 25-year-old’s shooting abilityafter Saturday’s Premier League encounter at Old Trafford, by stating: ’He has a very good kicking techniqueand he should be more composed,’ Van Gaal said to MUTV. ’I said to him ’you have to control the ball before
Table 18:	Random Paired Entity Control ExamplesA husband accused of trying to murder his cheating wife was ready to let her have sex with another man oncea month as long as she stayed with him, his trial heard yesterday. A close friend told how Joseph O’Riordan,74, had confided in him about the extraordinary plan for his 47-year-old wife Mandy. O’Riordan, a councillorand former nightclub owner, stabbed her eight times in a jealous rage after finding out she had been having anaffair with a postman. . Extraordinary deal: Joseph O’Riordan stabbed his wife of ten years Amanda (left) witha seven inch kitchen knife eight times - yesterday Brighton Crown Court heard he was considering allowingher to have affairs. She suffered life-threatening injuries after being knifed in the torso, chest, arms and back.
Table 19:	Random Length Control Examples. Control tokens are bolded.
Table 20:	Random Length Control Examples. Control tokens are bolded.
Table 21:	Random Length Control Examples. Control tokens are bolded.
Table 22:	Random Contribution Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 23:	Random Contribution Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 24:	Random Contribution Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 25:	Random Invention Purpose Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 26:	Random Invention Purpose Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 27:	Random Invention Purpose Summarization Examples. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 28:	Random Examples on Question-guided summarization. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 29:	Random Examples on Question-guided summarization. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
Table 30:	Random Examples on Question-guided summarization. Control tokens are bolded. “[]” denote that thetokens are used as both keywords and prompts.
