Table 1: Basic information and sensitive features in the the used data sets. The target variable isnot included in the number of features and is binary for all data sets. The pctOfIncome full name isloanRateAsPercentOfIncome.
Table 2: Comparison of original perturbation sampling and the TreeEnsemble generator with datafill-in inside the IME method. The results show average scores for the evaluation set. The col-umn Perturb. presents the perturbation based sampling and TEnsFillIn presents the sampling usingTreeEnsemble generator with missing parts of instances filled in. The Reduction column shows thereduction in the number of samples using the TEnsFillIn method compared to perturbations. TheCA stands for the classification accuracy of the explained classifier on the evaluation set.
Table 3: The robustness results for gLIME (top table), gSHAP (middle table), and gIME (bottomtable). The tables show the proportion of evaluation set instances, where the sensitive feature wasrecognized as the most important by the used explanation method. Columns represent the generatorsused for explanations. The row labels consist of the name of the dataset on which the experiment wasperformed and the name of the generator used for training of the adversarial model. Compas2 andCC2 denote attacks with two independent features. Perturbation represents the original samplingused in LIME, SHAP, and IME, TEnsFillIn represents a variant of the TreeEnsemble generatorwhere new instances are generated around the given one, and TreeEns represents the generationfrom the whole distribution.
Table 4: The differences in explanations between LIME and gLIME (top table), SHAP and gSHAP(middle table), and IME and gIME (bottom table). The tables show MAD and the variance of MADon evaluation set for every combination of the explanation method and predictive model. Columnsrepresent MAD and the variance of MAD on used datasets. The row labels consist of the usedclassifier and generator.
Table 5: Proportions of instances in % of the evaluation set on which the biased classifier wasdeployed for adversarial LIME (top table), SHAP (middle table) and IME model (bottom table).
Table 6: Percentages of instances where the sensitive feature (race) was recognized as the mostimportant feature with gLIME for adversarial attacks with one (top table) or two unrelated features(bottom table). The columns labeled Biased pred. represent the results on instances on which thebiased classifier was deployed, while the columns labeled All represent the results on the wholeevaluation sets. The numbers above represent the used threshold. The row labels are in the form<explainer>_<adversarial> where <explainer> denotes the generator used in the explanationmethod and <adversarial> denotes the generator used in the training of the adversarial model.
Table 7: Percentage of instances where the sensitive attribute (race) was recognized as the mostimportant feature with gSHAP for adversarial attacks with one (top table) or two unrelated fea-tures (bottom table). The columns labeled Biased pred. represent the results on instances on whichthe biased classifier was deployed, while columns labeled All represent the results on the wholeevaluation sets. The numbers above represent the used threshold. The row labels are in the form<explainer>_<adversarial> where <explainer> denotes the generator used in the explanationmethod and <adversarial> denotes the generator used in the training of the adversarial model.
Table 8: Percentages of instances where the sensitive attribute (race) was recognized as the mostimportant feature with gIME for adversarial attacks with one (top table) or two unrelated features(bottom table). The columns labeled Biased pred. represent the results on instances on which thebiased classifier was deployed, while the columns labeled All represent the results on the wholeevaluation sets. The numbers above represent the used threshold. The row labels are in the form<explainer>_<adversarial> where <explainer> denotes the generator used in the explanationmethod and <adversarial> denotes the generator used in the training of the adversarial model.
