Table 1: Hardware setup for testbed serversCPU	Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6226RCores	8FrequencyMemoryOSGPU2.90 GHz32 GBLinux 4.15.0-106-genericNVidia Tesla T4 GPU (Only in edge vehicles)Figure 2: Model descriptionThe model contains two different neural branches which consume spatial information and temporalinformation as the inputs of two streams and then output the predicted steering angle. For the firststream the model consumes 3 frames of RGB images, which can be denoted as {At-2, At-1, At}.
Table 2: Steering wheel angle regression error (RMSE) on test set of each edge vehicle (4 vehiclesin total)Table 3 gives the comparison of total training time and bytes transferred between Federated Learningand two baseline model. The total number of training epochs for all the models is 100 and the modeltraining is accelerated by Nvidia Tesla T4 GPU. The results show that Federated Learning needslightly more training time than independently locally trained model due to the model exchangetime cost. However, the training time of Federated Learning is reduced about 75% and we saveabout 25% bandwidth compared with traditional centralized learning method.
Table 3: Training Time and Bandwidth cost with different model training methods (4 Vehicles intotal)error and total training time of Federated Learning model with different number of vehicles. Theoverall value provides an overview of prediction performance among all of the test datasets belongsto all vehicles. With the increasing number of edge vehicles, the model prediction performance onthe edge is further enhanced. Furthermore, total model training time is linearly decreased corre-sponding to the increasing number of edge vehicles. Based on our results, we can summarize thatwith the participation of more edge vehicles and the larger size of the input datasets, the advantagesof Federated Learning will become more obvious.
Table 4: Overall steering wheel angle regression error (RMSE) and model training time of FederatedLearning model with different number of vehicles participated6	DiscussionBased on our experiment results, end-to-end on-device Federated Learning approach has more ad-vantages compared with commonly used centralized learning approach. Federated Learning modelcan achieve same level of model prediction accuracy but decrease model training time and the band-width cost. Furthermore, if we compared with independently local trained model, because of themodel sharing mechanism, Federated Learning can form a global knowledge of the whole datasetswhich are belongs to different participated edge vehicles. The model quality are largely enhancedand can achieve much better results.
