Table 2: Effectiveness of Baffle in comparison to state-of-the-art defenses for the constrain-and-scale attack on threedatasets, in terms of Backdoor AccUracy (BA) and Main TaskAccUracy (MA).
Table 3: Runtime in seconds of standard Baffle (S) in comparison to private Baffle using STPC(P). K is the number of participating clients. Note that the model size has no effect on the clustering.
Table 4: Effectiveness, in terms of Backdoor Accu-racy (BA), Main Task Accuracy (MA), True PositiveRate (TPR), and True Negative Rate (TNR), of stan-dard Baffle (S) in comparison to private Baffle us-ing STPC (P) in percent.
Table 5: Datasets used in our evaluations for word prediction (WP), image classification (IC), andnetwork intrusion detection system (NIDS) scenarios.
Table 6: Characteristics of IoT datasetsDataset	No. devices	Time (hours)	Size (MB)	Packets (millions)Baffle-Benign	28	-7 603	1 153	6.4DIoT-Benign	18	2352	578	2.3UNSW-Benign	27	7 457	11 759	23.9DIoT-Attack	5	80	7 734	21.91.	BAFFLE-Benign: Traffic that we captured from 28 IoT devices in three smart home settingsand an office setting. The smart home settings consist of two flats and one house in differentcities, with 1 to 4 inhabitants. The office setting is a 20 m2 office for two people. In eachexperiment, we deployed 28 IoT devices for more than one week and encouraged users touse the devices as part of their daily activities.
Table 7: Effectiveness of the clustering component, in terms of True Positive Rate (TPR) and TrueNegative Rate (TNR), of BAFFLE in comparison to existing defenses for the constrain-and-scaleattack on three datasets. All values are in percentage and the best results of the defenses are markedin bold (cf. §E.2 for detailed information about the metrics).
Table 8: Resilience to model alignment attacks in terms of Backdoor Accuracy (BA), Main TaskAccuracy (MA), True Positive Rate (TPR), True Negative Rate (TNR) in percent (for detailedinformation about the metrics cf. §E.2).
Table 9: Comparison of the Backdoor Accuracy (BA) when injecting different backdoors whileusing (1) Poison Elimination, (2) Clustering, and (3) Baffle as defense (Main Task AccuracyMA = 99.8% for all cases in BAFFLE).
Table 10: Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and Main Task Accuracy (MA) when applying (1) PoisonElimination, (2) Clustering, and (3) Baffle as defense.
Table 11: Main Task Accuracy (MA), Backdoor Accuracy (BA), True Positive Rate (TPR), andTrue Negative Rate (TNR) of BAFFLE for different NLP backdoors (all values in percentage).
Table 12: Parameter setup for the evaluation of Baffle against the DBA.
Table 13: Main Task Accuracy (MA) and Backdoor Accuracy (BA) of BAFFLE against the DBA(all values in percentage).
Table 14: Communication in GB of private Baffle’s Cosine distances and of the Euclidean dis-tances/CliPPing/model aggregation with different numbers of accepted models 与 + 1 and differentapplications/model sizes. K is the number of clients and clustering is independent of the model size.
