Table 1: Extrapolation performance over unattributed graphs shows clear advantage of environment-invariant representations Γ∙, with or without GNN, over standard (interpolation) methods in extrapola-tion test accuracy. Interpolation and extrapolation distributions contain different-size graphs. (Left) Classifiesschizophrenic individuals using brain functional networks where graphs are on average 40% smaller at extrap-olation environment. (Right) A graph classification task with Y = p ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.8} as the edge probabilitiesof Erdos-Renyi graphs, whose sizes are N(train), N(interp-test) ∈ {20,..., 80} in train & test interpolation andN (extr-test) ∈ {140, . . . , 200} in test extrapolation. Table shows mean (standard deviation) accuracy.
Table 2: Extrapolation performance over attributed graphs shows clear advantage of environment-invariant representations with regularization in Equation (10) . The goal is to classify the cross-blocks edgeprobability Y = P1,2 = P2,1 ∈ {0.1, 0.3} of a Stochastic Block Model (SBM) with vertex attribute distribu-tions that change between training and test extrapolation environments. Interpolation and extrapolation distribu-tions contain different-size graphs: Train & test interpolation contains graphs with N (train) = N (interp-test) = 20,test extrapolation contains graphs with N (extr-test) = 40. Table shows mean (standard deviation) accuracy.
Table 3: Average (standard deviation) number of five cliques with varying colorations in a graphacross training, interpolation test and extrapolation test. The target is the number of 5-cliques with-out any green vertices, the sum of the clique-types indicated in the first two row headings.
Table 4: Extrapolation performance over attributed graphs shows clear advantage of environment-invariant methods that use GNNs. We count #{5-cliques with no green vertices}. Vertex color distributionchanges with environment. Table shows Mean Absolute Error (MAE) over interpolation environment (train &test) and extrapolation test. Results show mean (standard deviation) MAE.
