Table 1: Results for 1 variable in the Coarse and Fine configuration for both Infix and Prefixrepresentation.
Table 2: Results for 2 variables for the Coarse configuration for both Infix and prefix representa-tions.
Table 3: Results for fine and coarse configurations for 1 Variable for annotated proofs(Medium coeff), the 2 variable models outperform the corresponding 1 variable models. For thelarge coeff case, the improvement is close to 6% over the 1 variable model. As expected, the 2Variable models perform better on 1 variable dataset than 2 variable. The results for OOD evaluationwith respect to coefficient limits, polynomial degree and polynomial length (no. of terms in startingpolynomial) are discussed in the Appendix (Tables 15 & 16).
Table 4: List of notations, and corresponding constraints that a generated polynomial satisfies.
Table 5: Size Estimates for the problem space, after generating sets of size 5M.
Table 6: Results for fine configuration for 2 Variables for Infix and Prefix representation (No cur-riculum, No annotation).
Table 7: Errors for 1 variable in the Coarse and Fine configuration for both Infix and Prefix inputrepresentation. (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 8: Errors for 2 variables in the Coarse and Fine configuration for both Infix and Prefix inputrepresentation. (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 9: Results for fine and coarse configurations for 2 Variables for annotated proofs (Nocurriculum).
Table 10: Errors for fine and coarse configurations for 1 Variable for annotated proofs (No cur-riculum).
Table 11: Errors for fine and coarse configurations for 2 Variable for annotated proofs (No cur-riculum).
Table 12: Results for 1 Variable Symbolic Coeff setting. (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 13: Errors made by models in 1 Variable Symbolic Coeff setting. (No curriculum, No annota-tion).
Table 14: Results for OOD Testing. NVAR = 2 Coarse/Prefix models tested on correspondingNVAR = 1 setting (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 15: OOD Testing: Prefix/Coarse 1 Variable Models tested on various coefficient limit config-urations (Small, Medium and Coarse). (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 16: Prefix/Coarse 1 Variable Models tested on various #term and degree configurations(Medium degree and Medium terms). (No curriculum, No annotation).
Table 17: Curriculum Learning results for 1 variable for the Coarse configuration for both Infixand prefix representations.
