Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ZCal: Calibrating radio interferometric data
WITH MACHINE LEARNING
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Calibration is the most critical data processing step needed for generating images
of high dynamic range (CASA cookbook, 2009). With ever-increasing data vol-
umes produced by modern radio telescopes (Aniyan & Thorat, 2017), astronomers
are overwhelmed by the amount of data that needs to be manually processed and
analyzed using limited computational resources (Yatawatta, 2020). Therefore, in-
telligent and automated systems are required to overcome these challenges. Tra-
ditionally, astronomers use a package such as Common Astronomy Software Ap-
plications (CASA) to compute the gain solutions based on regular observations
of a known calibrator source (Thompson et al., 2017) (Abebe, 2015) (Grobler
et al., 2016) (CASA cookbook, 2009). The traditional approach to calibration is
iterative and time-consuming (Jajarmizadeh et al., 2017), thus, the proposal of ma-
chine learning techniques. The applications of machine learning have created an
opportunity to deal with complex problems currently encountered in radio astron-
omy data processing (Aniyan & Thorat, 2017). In this work, we propose the use
of supervised machine learning models to first generation calibration (1GC), us-
ing the KAT-7 telescope environmental and pointing sensor data recorded during
observations. Applying machine learning to 1GC, as opposed to calculating the
gain solutions in CASA, has shown evidence of reducing computation, as well as
accurately predicting the 1GC gain solutions and antenna behaviour. These meth-
ods are computationally less expensive, however they have not fully learned to
generalise in predicting accurate 1GC solutions by looking at environmental and
pointing sensors. We use an ensemble multi-output regression models based on
random forest, decision trees, extremely randomized trees and K-nearest neigh-
bor algorithms. The average prediction error obtained during the testing of our
models on testing data is ≈ 0.01 < rmse < 0.09 for gain amplitude per antenna,
and 0.2rad < rmse < 0.5rad for gain phase. This shows that the instrumental
parameters used to train our model strongly correlate with gain amplitude effects
than a phase.
1	Introduction
Modern-day astronomy is at an unprecedented stage, with a deluge of data from different telescopes.
In contrast to conventional methods, today astronomical discoveries are data-driven. The upcoming
Square Kilometer Array (SKA) is expected to produce terabytes of data every hour (The SKA tele-
scope). With this exponential growth of data, challenges for data calibration, reduction, and analysis
also increase (Aniyan & Thorat, 2017), making it difficult for astronomers to manually process and
analyse the data (Yatawatta, 2020). Therefore, intelligent and automated systems are required to
overcome these challenges. One of the main issues in radio astronomy is determining the quality of
observational data. Astronomical signals are very weak by the time they reach the Earth’s surface.
They are easily corrupted by atmospheric interferences, incorrect observational parameters (e.g.
telescope locations or telescope pointing parameters), malfunctioning signal receivers, interference
from terrestrial man-made radio sources and tracking inaccuracies (Taylor et al., 1999). Therefore,
it is required to do proper corrections to the observational data before processing the data. Radio
astronomers spend a considerable amount of time performing a series of preprocessing steps called
calibration, which involves the determination of a set of parameters to correct the received data.
These generally include instrumental as well as astronomical parameters. The general strategy for
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
doing these corrections makes use of a calibrator source. Calibrator sources are well suited for deter-
mining astronomical parameters for data corrections because they have known characteristics such
as the brightness, shape, and frequency spectrum (Taylor et al., 1999). This process of calibration
is iterative and time-consuming. During scientific observations, different external parameters such
as atmospheric pressure, temperature wind conditions, and relative humidity are collected through
thousands of sensors attached to the telescopes and its adjoining instrumentation. The data com-
ing from different sensors may provide information about the external conditions that may have
corrupted the observed data. This piece of information is not always included in the conventional
calibration steps. We propose to use machine learning methods to predict the calibration solutions,
looking at pointing and environmental sensor data. This is mainly motivated by the fact that cali-
bration steps make corrections to data that has been corrupted by environmental parameters. In this
study, we make use of data from the Karoo Array Telescope (KAT-7), an array consisting of seven
telescopes, which is a precursor to the MeerKAT radio telescope The SKA telescope. We look at
eight types of sensor data recorded during observations, with a calibrator source PKS1613-586 to
generate the training and testing dataset. The overall generated dataset contains sensor data per
telescope and calibration solutions for the signal received by each telescope in horizontal polariza-
tion (H-pol) and vertical polarization (V-pol). These calibrator solutions are calculated using the
astronomy software called Common Astronomy Software Applications.
2	Calibration
In radio astronomy, ideally one might think that after obtaining the observed visibilities the next
step would be to directly retrieve the actual visibilities of the target source and perform imaging.
However, the measured visibilities V obs are different from the actual visibilities V True and this is
due to instrumental and environmental effects (Richard Thompson et al., 2017). An example of
these effects on the signal measured by a radio interferometry include antenna gains (slowly and
fast time-varying instrumental part), atmospheric effects, pointing errors (tracking inaccuracies) and
incorrect observation parameters (antenna pointing parameters). Signal effects are classified into two
types, direction-independent effects (affecting the signal from all directions equally) and direction-
dependent effects (which vary based on the sky position of the signal) (Taylor et al., 1999). These
effects can be corrected by estimating the errors associated with the measured visibilities, thereby
recovering the true visibilities. This process is called calibration. In its simplest form, calibration
minimizes the error between observed and predicted (model) visibilities by estimating the correct
complex instrumental gain response (Grobler et al., 2016). Suppose for baseline pair (i, j), the
observed visibility is Vio,jbs (t) and the true visibility is ViT,jrue (t) at observation time t. The basic
calibration formula is written as,
Vio,jbs = Gi,jViT,jrue+i,j(t)	(1)
where, Gi,j(t) denotes the complex antenna gains for baseline (i, j) as a result of unwanted effects
and may vary with time (Thompson et al., 2001). The extra term i,j (t) is a stochastic complex
noise (Taylor et al., 1999). Most of the corruptions in data occur before the signal is correlated and
the response associated with antenna i does not depend on the response of antenna j . Note that the
sources that are the subject of astronomical investigation will be referred to as ”target sources” to
distinguish them from calibrator sources (Thompson et al., 2001).
3	KAT-7 Telescope
The KAT-7 is a seven-dish interferometry that was built as an engineering prototype for techniques
and technologies in preparation for the 64-dish Karoo Array Telescope (MeerKAT) (Foley et al.,
2016). These instruments are located in the Northern Cape Karoo desert region and are operated
remotely from Cape Town. The construction of KAT-7 began in 2008 with the writing of the tele-
scope requirements specification and was completed in 2010. It was then operated in engineering
(commissioning) mode until its shut-down in 2016 (Foley et al., 2016).
3.1	Sensor data
During science observations, different external parameters like atmospheric pressure, temperature
wind conditions, and relative humidity are also collected through thousands of sensors attached
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
to the telescopes and its adjoining instrumentation. The data coming from different sensors may
provide information about the external conditions that may have corrupted the observed data. This
piece of information is not always included in the conventional calibration steps. We propose to use
machine learning methods to predict the calibration solutions looking at pointing and environmental
sensor data. This is mainly motivated by the fact that calibration steps do corrections to data that
is corrupted by environmental parameters. In this study, we make use of the data from the Karoo
Array Telescope (KAT-7). We look at pointing azimuth, elevation, scan, offset, temperature, wind
speed, air pressure, relative humidity sensor data recorded during observations with a calibrator
source PKS1613 - 586 to generate the training and testing dataset. The overall generated dataset
contains sensor data per telescope and calibration solutions for correcting the signal received by
each telescope in horizontal polarization (h-pol) and vertical polarization (v-pol). These calibrator
solutions are calculated using one of the traditional astronomy software called CASA which is used
for data calibration and imaging in radio astronomy.
3.2	Preparation of training data
The objective of this study is to find correlations between calibration solutions and sensor informa-
tion on the telescope. Therefore, the main dataset for the study is the time-based sensor information
of each antenna. The process of data collection encompasses all of the steps required to obtain the
desired data in digital format. Methods of data collection include acquiring and archiving new ob-
servations, querying existing databases according to the science problem at hand, and performing as
necessary any cross-matching or data combining (Ball & Brunner, 2010).
In every observation, the collected data are stored by the data capturing system in the Hierarchical
Data Format (HDF5), which is a set of file formats designed to store and organize large amounts of
data. The HDF5 file consists of two parts meta-data and observed visibilities. In meta-data one finds
static information of the data set, including observer, dump rate and all the available subarrays and
spectral windows in the data set selection criteria (antennas, channel frequencies, targets, scan infor-
mation) and sensor data of interest as a function of time. The data observed by the radio telescope
are in the form of complex numbers referred to as visibilities. Each source observed contains its
own visibilities as a function of time along with sensor data, which keep a record of the telescope’s
activity and behaviour as these are observed.
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
UOIgLSɪɔəɑ ilwr
PKS1613-586
10,
20,
30,
40'
50,
—59°
10,
20,
J2000 Right Ascension
16h24m	21m 19m 17m 15m 13m
O
-0.0θ
Figure 1: An image of the phase calibrator PKS1613-586 located at RA, Dec (J2000) using CLEAN
task in CASA.
In preparation for the training and testing dataset, we look at environmental sensors and instrumental
sensors recorded during observations with a flux calibrator and a phase calibrator source PKS1613-
586 in Figure 1. The chosen sensors of interest from each observation are: air temperature, wind
speed, wind direction, air pressure, relative humidity, actual refraction elevation, actual refraction
azimuth, actual scan elevation, actual scan azimuth, actual pointing elevation and actual pointing
azimuth.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
4	Proposed method
Different calibration techniques have been developed with the enhancement of the dynamics of the
modern radio astronomy instruments to address these challenges raised by the new instruments,
providing precise calibration performance. These techniques are loosely classified into first genera-
tion calibration (1GC), second generation calibration (2GC) and third generation calibration (3GC)
(Noordam & Smirnov, 2010). In this study, we concentrate on generating 1GC calibration with the
help of machine learning techniques. Our aim is to provide a machine learning model that predicts
calibration solutions from sensor data from the telescope. This approach would help to speed up the
calibration processes and decrease the time period of the calibrator monitoring, thus improving the
time duration duration for tracking the target source observed as shown in 2.
(a) Observation procedure and calibration using
CASA
(b) Observation procedure using machine learning
Figure 2: Observation procedures
Several different approaches are employed in machine learning regression. These approaches learn
the relationship between the input and output by fitting a model directly from the data. In this
study, we consider tree-based approaches: Decision tree, random forest, extremely randomized tree,
and the neighborhood search approach: (K-nearest neighbor) to tackle our problem. We call our
approach ZCal model which is multi-output regression. We formulate our regression estimation
problem as follows:
Suppose we have a feature matrix of sensor data
x11 x12 x13
X21 X22 X23
...
...
...
xd1 xd2 xd3
x1n
x2n
.=(Xij) ∈ R	,i ∈{1, 2,...,d} ,j ∈{1, 2,...,n}
.
.
xdn
and corresponding complex target variables to learn and predict on,
y11 X21 . . .	y12 y22 . . .	y13	. y23	. .. . .	. .	y1m . .	y2m . ..	= (yk,ι) ∈ Cd×m,k ∈{1,2,.	. , d} , l ∈ {1, 2, .	. . , m}
yd1	yd2	yd3	.	. . ydm			
where each column represents a vector of length d, containing unique calibration solutions as func-
tion of time t per observation represented as a complex variable Aeiφ = A(cos φ + i sin φ) for each
polarization H&V (Thompson et al., 2017).
Due to different physical causes on the received signal, we therefore choose to treat the antenna
phases and amplitudes separately by splitting equation the complex variable into gain amplitude
solutions Aeiφ and gain phase solutions φ.
We construct a learning machine, M : Xt → Yt, which when given a validation set of sensor
*	*
examples, X,t, minimises some measure of discrepancy between its prediction M (Xt) ≈ Yt, and
the value of Yt, where M represents the predictor. We measure the discrepancy using four com-
monly used statistical measures in regression (Borchani et al., 2015): coefficient of determination,
explained variance, root mean squared error (RMSE) and root mean absolute error (RMAE).
The aim of this regression exercise is to
predict multiple target variables Yb t hence it is referred to
^
as multi-output regression. The learned model will then be used to predict multi-output values Yt+1
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
of all target variables of the new incoming unlabelled instances Xt+1. It has been proven that multi-
output regression methods provide means to model the multi-output datasets effectively and produce
better predictive results (Borchani et al., 2015). This method does not only consider the underlying
relationships between the features and the corresponding targets but also the relationships between
the targets themselves, thereby producing simpler models with better computational efficiency (Bor-
chani et al., 2015). Borchani et al. (2015) discuss several applications of multi-output regression
including the challenges such as missing data, i.e., when some features or target variables are not
observed.
5	Results and Discussion
Antenna		Extremely randomized Phase				
	rmse	Rmae	R2score	Explained σ2
Uniform average-H	0.337	0.336	0.936	0.936
Uniform average-V	0.235	0.301	0.956	0. 957
	Extremely randomized tree amplitude			
Uniform average-H	0.027	0.083	0.925	0.925
Uniform average-V	0.027	0.083	0.923	0.923
Table 1: The table shows the performance of the extremely randomized tree algorithm as the best
method in predicting the amplitude and phase gain solutions for both H and V polarization as shown
in figures 3. The values shown represents the uniform average of all KAT-7 antennas, i.e., all output
measures are averaged with uniform weight. Most of the predictions stay near the ideal truth values
with RMSE and RMAE ≈< 0.5, R2 and explained variance V are converging to 1.
Figure 3: Root mean square error for each learning algorithm in predicting the H and V polarization
phase and amplitude gain solutions for each antenna. The blue, green, red and purple lines represent
the different learning algorithms used in the experiment.
From Figure 3, we observes that the learning algorithms have learned this behaviour pattern with rms
error accuracy ≈ ≤ 0.5 Radians during test time, resulting in predicting zero phase gain solutions for
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
antenna 5 for both polarizations. Similarly for amplitude gain, we have achieved an error of less than
0.02 during training time. We validated our models looking at one observational data for a calibrator
source PKS1613-586. We provide our models with sensor data during tracking of the calibrator
source as input to our trained model. The phase and amplitude output predictions in Figures 4 and
5 shows that the models have learned to generalize for the reference antenna 5, by predicting zero
phases for antenna 5 H and V polarization, assuming that the antenna was stable without any drop-
outs during the period of the observation with antenna 6 and antenna 7 being a bit nosier. In Figure
3, though the models were supposed to perform differently because of their parameter settings, one
notices that the random forest, K-nearest neighbor and the extremely randomised trees methods are
very close to one another in rms error as a function of antenna 1H, 2H, 5H, 6H and 7H, whereas
there are large large rms error bars in each model per antenna 3H and 4H. Such behaviour gives
us an idea about the instability of these two antennas. This is valuable information that will make
contribution towards flagging corrupted data due to unstable antennas.
These models managed to learn the most critical part, i.e., the sinusoidal variation of the gain am-
plitude solutions over time as shown in Figures 5. However, We observe that the machine learning
amplitude is performing lower than CASA solutions with a factor of 33.33%.
In Figure 5, The model predicts a drop in amplitude as a function of time in the middle of the ob-
servation from 0.12 to 0.09 level of CASA, while as the true amplitude have not dropped. From this
unique behaviour observed, we can conclude that it is either due to prediction failure as the models
have been trained on limited amount of observations and therefore failing on different observation
settings, or it could be a behaviour that CASA did not detect as it does not include sensor data when
calculating its calibration solutions.
…	Anti-phase gain solutions	ιcn	Ant2-phase gain solutions
(6 ①Cl)① sπ5qd
80	100
Time index
Figure 4: This figure shows the response of the extremely randomized tree learning algorithm in
predicting the phase gain solutions for the calibrator PKS1613-586 from the validation data. In
each subplot we compare the predicted phase gain solutions (where H polarization is represented
by red and V-polarization is represented by yellow) with the CASA generated phase gain solutions
(where H polarization is represented by blue and V-polarization is represented by green). The ex-
tremely randomized tree algorithm is failing to predict the gain phase solutions for some antennas
and performing well in others with few outliers.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Ant3-amplitude gain solutions
Irrliyt**c
əpn---aujv
Figure 5: This figure shows the response of the extremely randomized tree learning algorithm in
predicting the amplitude gain solutions for the calibrator PKS1613-586 from the validation data.
In each subplot we compare the predicted amplitude gain solutions (where H polarization is rep-
resented by red and V-polarization is represented by yellow) with the CASA generated phase gain
solutions (where H polarization is represented by blue and V-polarization is represented by green).
The extremely randomized tree algorithm is failing to predict the gain amplitude solutions in all
the antennas, for solutions at time index < 70. We further observe that at time index 80 the algo-
rithm performing better in predicting the amplitude solutions, slightly close to CASA on the new
observation dataset.
6	Conclusion
We have shown that the application of machine learning techniques to telescope sensor data opens
a new avenue in the development of calibration methods. We used the telescope sensor data to
learn the variability of the complex gain calibration solutions for the calibrator PKS1613-586 as a
function of time. The implementation of the ZCal algorithm is based on regression machine learn-
ing algorithms, to predict the calibration solutions and study each antenna’s behaviour. Using the
1GC calibration solutions obtained with CASA, we constructed a matrix of training sample nL and
testing sample nT to train the machine learning algorithms (decision tree, random forest, extremely
randomised trees, and K-nearest neighbor) to be able to discern the patterns that relate complex gain
solutions to external parameters. Since gain solutions are complex, we have implemented ZCal to
learn on phase and amplitude separately. Each learning algorithm ran on the learning sample N
times and its error was estimated on the test sample. We presented a statistical framework to mea-
sure the accuracy of each multi-output regression mode and our results are encouraging with an rms
error of ≈ ≤ 0.5 rad during testing of our models using the testing data for gain amplitude and
phase. Comparing the performance of these algorithms, the random forest, extremely randomized
tree and K-nearest neighbours were shown to be the best for our purpose. We observed that the
environmental and the pointing sensor readings were more strongly correlated to the amplitude than
phase. Consequently, the ability to predict gain-phase was overall poor; gain-amplitude prediction
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
was accurate in some cases (capturing non-trivial behaviour such as oscillations), and completely
failed in others. The purpose of the study was to show that machine learning techniques can make
available connections ”blindly” without access to physical intuition. The accurate prediction of
gain-amplitudes, in some cases, suggests that this is indeed feasible. It is not clear what caused the
failed predictions, although we can always speculate on physical differences between observations
that our sensors were not sensitive to. We can therefore expect that with access to a larger array of
sensors, the ZCal approach will be able to make better gain predictions.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
References
Ermias Abebe. A study of potential calibrators using the kat-7 radio telescope. 2015.
AK Aniyan and Kshitij Thorat. Classifying radio galaxies with the convolutional neural network.
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 230(2):20, 2017.
Nicholas M Ball and Robert J Brunner. Data mining and machine learning in astronomy. Interna-
tional Journal ofModern Physics D, 19(07):1049-1106, 2010.
Hanen Borchani, Gherardo Varando, Concha Bielza, and Pedro Larrafiaga. A survey on multi-output
regression. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 5(5):216-
233, 2015.
Public Release CASA cookbook. Casa user reference & cookbook. 2009.
AR Foley, T Alberts, RP Armstrong, A Barta, EF Bauermeister, H Bester, S Blose, RS Booth,
DH Botha, SJ Buchner, et al. Engineering and science highlights of the kat-7 radio telescope.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 460(2):1664-1679, 2016.
TL Grobler, AJ Stewart, SJ Wijnholds, JS Kenyon, and OM Smirnov. Calibration artefacts in radio
interferometry-iii. phase-only calibration and primary beam correction. Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 461(3):2975-2992, 2016.
Milad Jajarmizadeh, Lariyah Mohd Sidek, Sobri Harun, and Mohsen Salarpour. Optimal calibra-
tion and uncertainty analysis of swat for an arid climate. Air, Soil and Water Research, 10:
1178622117731792, 2017.
Jan E Noordam and Oleg M Smirnov. The meqtrees software system and its use for third-generation
calibration of radio interferometers. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 524:A61, 2010.
A Richard Thompson, James M Moran, and George W Swenson Jr. Interferometry and synthesis in
radio astronomy. Springer Nature, 2017.
Greg B Taylor, Chris Luke Carilli, and Richard A Perley. Synthesis imaging in radio astronomy ii.
ASPC, 180, 1999.
The SKA telescope. The ska telescope. https://www.skatelescope.org/, Accessed May
2017.
A Richard Thompson, James M Moran, and George W Swenson Jr. Interferometry and synthesis in
radio astronomy. In isra, 2001.
Anthony Richard Thompson, James M Moran, George Warner Swenson, et al. Interferometry and
synthesis in radio astronomy. Springer, 2017.
Sarod Yatawatta. Stochastic calibration of radio interferometers. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 493(4):6071-6078, 2020.
9