Figure 1: In a segmentation task, low-density regions rarely correspond to class boundaries. (a) Animage from Camvid dataset. (b) Average L2 distance between raw pixel contents of a patch centeredat pixel p and four overlapping patches centred on the immediate neighbors of p, using 15×15 pixelpatches. (c) Same for a more realistic receptive field size of 225×225 pixels. Dark blue indicateslarge inter-patch distance and therefore a low density region, white indicates a distance of 0. Thered lines indicate segmentation ground truth boundaries.
Figure 2: Toy 2D semi-supervised classification experiments. Blue and red circles indicate super-vised samples from class 0 and 1 respectively. The field of small black dots indicate unsupervisedsamples. The learned decision function is visualized by rendering the probability of class 1 in green;the soft gradation represents the gradual change in predicted class probability. (a, b) Semi-supervisedlearning with and without a low density region separating the classes. The dotted orange line in (a)shows the decision boundary obtained with plain supervised learning. (c) Rendering of the distanceto the true class boundary with distance map contours. Strong colours indicate greater distance toclass boundary. (d) Decision boundary learned when samples are perturbed along distance contoursin (c). The magenta line indicates the true class boundary. Appendix A explains the setup in detail.
Figure 3: Illustration of mixing regularization for semi-supervised semantic segmentation with themean teacher framework. 0$ and θt denote the weights of the student and teacher networks, respec-tively. The arbitrary mask M is omitted from the argument list of function mix for legibility.
Figure 4: Example CowOut/CowMix masks with p = 0.5 and varying σ in a 384×384 pixel image.
Figure 5: Histogram of L2 distance between pairs of patches of size 225 × 225 centred on neigh-boring pixels, split between those with the same class in blue and pairs that lie either side of a classboundary in orange. Computed from all patches in the Cityscapes dataset whose central pixel hasa valid ground truth class.
Figure 6: Histogram of the ratio of the distances b, where n is the L2 pixel content distance fromthe query patch Qi drawn from image Ij to the nearest neighbour / most similar patch drawn fromimage Ik such that k 6= j and b is the distance from the query patch Qi to the patch Pi centred ona neighbouring pixel that has a different ground truth class. Put simply, this histogram illustratesthat the closest patch to Qi found in any other image in CITYSCAPES is typically at around 3× thedistance as an immediate neighbour that lies on the other side of a class boundary.
Figure 7: ResNet-50 based U-Net decoder architecture.
Figure 8: Visualization of semi-supervised segmentation on Cityscapes, 100 supervised samplescontext of segmentation, we found that this masks pixels close to class boundaries as they usuallyhave a low confidence. These regions are often large enough to encompass small objects, preventinglearning and degrading performance. Instead we modulate the consistency loss with the proportionof pixels whose confidence is above the threshold. This values grows throughout training, taking theplace of the sigmoidal ramp-up used in Laine & Aila (2017); Tarvainen & Valpola (2017).
Figure 9: Visualization of semi-supervised segmentation on augmented Pascal VOC dataset, 100supervised samplesCamVid-val. mloU (%)Figure 10: Effect of consistency weight hyper-parameter. In each bar, the central line is the mean,with the extents of the bar placed 1 standard deviation each side.
Figure 10: Effect of consistency weight hyper-parameter. In each bar, the central line is the mean,with the extents of the bar placed 1 standard deviation each side.
Figure 11: Effect of mean teacher EMA hyper-parameter.
Figure 12: Effect of CowMix σmin and σmax hyper-parameters. A single value indicates that σ wasfixed, while a range (e..g 4-16) indicates σ 〜log U(4,16).
