Figure 1: MDS on W (left) and S (right): Cora dataset where W is of size (2708 × 2708) with true 7 clustersAs we aim to perform clustering, we propose to integrate it in the formulation of a new data repre-sentation by assuming that nodes with the same label tend to similar social relations and similar nodeattributes. This idea is inspired by the fact that, the labels are strongly influenced by both contentand structure information and inherently correlated to these both information sources. This remindsus that the idea behind the Canonical Discriminant Analysis (CDA) which is a dimension-reductiontechnique related to principal component analysis (PCA) and canonical correlation (Goodfellowet al., 2016). Given groups of observations with measurements on attributes, CDA derives a linearcombination of the variables that has the highest possible multiple correlation with the groups. Itcan be viewed as a particular PCA where the observations belonging to a same group are replacedby their centroid. Thereby the new data representation referred to as M = (mij ) of size (n × d)can be considered as a multiplicative integration of both W and X by replacing each node by thecentroid of their neighborhood (barycenter): i.e, mij = kn=1 wikxkj , ∀i, j orM=WX.	(2)In Figure 3.1, it is interesting to point out the impact of W in the formulation of M. We applyCDA on X and M and indicate the seven true clusters of the Cora dataset. This leads to showclusters better separated with M than with X and therefore that W already does a good job withoutclustering.
Figure 2: CDA on X (left) and M (right): Cora dataset where X is of size (2708 × 1433) with true 7 clustersIn this way, given a graph G, a graph clustering aims to partition the nodes in G into k disjointclusters {C1, C2, ..., Ck}, so that: (1) nodes within the same cluster are close to each other whilenodes in different clusters are distant in terms of graph structure; and (2) the nodes within the samecluster are more likely to have similar attribute values.
Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis of λ using Acc, NMI and ARI.
Figure 4: Evaluation of SANECS using tf-idf normalization of X and cosine metric for WX .
Figure 5: From top to bottom and from left to right, UMAP applied on X, M and B respectively.
