Figure 1: Schematic of the k-NN defense with k = 3However, as seen in the illustrative example with two poisons, the poisons are likely to be surroundedby points of the target class rather than the base class. The inset in Figure 1 illustrates this: whenk = 3, two poisons will always have 2/3 or more of their neighbors as non-poisons. As illustrated,since the label of the plurality of a poisons neighbors does not match the label of the poison, thepoison will be removed from the dataset. More generally, for p poisons, if k = 2p + 1, then wewould expect the poisons to be outvoted by members of the target class and be removed.
Figure 2: Tradeoffs for the selection of k in the k-NN defense for a representative Poison Frogsattack. For small k, the poisons may be all filtered out, while for large k, classification accuracy onthe test set may suffer due to the reduced training set size. Surprisingly we find that large k does notnoticeably reduce the classification accuracy.
Figure 3: Attack success rate on transfer learning of convex polytope attack. The success rate of theattack when using the k-NN defense is so low that the bar is barely visible.
Figure 4: Feature space visualization of transfer learning poisoning k-NN defense - DPN92 (Chenet al., 2017b).
Figure 5: Feature space visualization of transfer learning poisoning - ResNet18 (Chen et al., 2017).
Figure 6: Normalized distance from poison to target for ResNet18 and Robust ResNet188Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020ReferencesAnish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David Wagner. Obfuscated gradients give a false sense ofsecurity: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00420,2018.
Figure 7: Representative images from the attack and k-NN defense are shown. The poisons in theship class do not visually look aberrant for members of the ship class, however the k-NN defensefilters them. In the bottom two rows, filtered and non-filtered nonpoisons are ShoWn-again there arenot visually distinctive differences between pictures in the same class that are filtered rather than notfiltered.
