Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of the proposed adversarial learning approach of divide-and-ConqUer (DACAL). It decomposes the high-quality image distribution learning problem intoperception-, frequency- and dimension-based sub-problems in a hierarchical structure. Followingthe division, the sub-problems are conquered and combined in a deep adversarial training fashion.
Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed network design for our adversarial learning approach of divide-and-conquer. Specially, We apply the perception-based division to the generator, the frequency-based one to the discriminator input, and the dimension-based one to the discriminator output.
Figure 3: Results of WGAN (Gulrajani et al. (2017)), AdaWGAN (Chen et al. (2018)),SWGAN (Wu et al. (2019)) and the proposed AdaSWGAN (three rows indicate training for 1000,2500 and 5000 iterations resp.) for the 25 Gaussians dataset. The orange points represent the targetdistribution, green points are the generated samples, and the curves indicate the value surfaces of thediscriminators of compared models.
Figure 4: Visual results of additive, multiplicative components and their combination. It is best tozoom in on the high-resolution pictures.
Figure 5: High-resolution image enhancement results for the DPED iPhone-DSLR data. It is best tozoom in on the high-resolution pictures.
Figure 6: High-resolution image enhancement results for our Huawei-Flickr data. It is best to zoomin on the high-resolution pictures.
Figure 7: Illustration of the used multi-scaled enhancer (a) and multi-scaled discriminator (b) forour proposed method13Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Among them, netG1 , netG2, netG3 form the lower-scale enhancer. Therefore, the higher-scale en-hancer inherits netG1 , netG2, netG3 from lower-scale enhancer, and introduces two new compo-nents that are netG0 and netG4. Note that the layer named ‘conv-color-illu’ realizes the two-streambranches, which contains separate groups of convolutions operations, and finally aggregates themusing the Eqn.1 in the major paper. Figure 7 (b) shows the structure of our multiscaled discriminatorthat contains netD0, netD1 and netS1. The component netS1 is designed for the computation ofsliced Wasserstein distance. Analogously, netD1 and netS1 are from lower-scale discriminator. Thehigher-scale discriminators add one more component netD0 .
