Figure 1: (a) Examples of multi-domain methods. The rows from top to bottom show artistic, photo-realistic and semantic style transfer, respectively. (b) Typical examples of artistic style transfer.
Figure 2: Qualitative comparisons of different initialization strategies. The first column shows thecontent image (top) and the style image (bottom). The other columns show the initialization images(top) and the corresponding style transfer results (bottom) of method Gatys et al. (2016). In column(f), we initialize with the default stylized result of method Li & Wand (2016) (SROOM). In column(g), we replace the content image with SROOM and then initialize with it (RC-SROOM).
Figure 3: Quantitative comparisons of different initialization strategies on total (left), content (cen-ter) and style (right) loss.
Figure 4: Our proposed cascade style transfer, which contains two architectures: a) serial styletransfer, b) parallel style transfer.
Figure 5: Comparisons of different serial schemes of some NST methods, i.e., (a) Sheng et al.
Figure 6: Qualitative comparisons in artistic (top), semantic (middle) and photo-realistic (bottom)style transfer. More results can be found in appendix.
Figure 7: More results of different initialization strategies on method Gatys et al. (2016)11Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020A.1.2 LI & WAND (2016)Fig. 8 shows more results of different initialization strategies on method Li & Wand (2016). Thefirst column shows the content image (top) and the style image (bottom). The other columns showthe initialization images (top) and the corresponding style transfer results (bottom) of method Li &Wand (2016). In column (f), we initialize with the default stylized results of method Gatys et al.
Figure 8: More results of different initialization strategies on method Li & Wand (2016)12Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020A.2 More Serial S chemes for SSTA.2. 1 Artistic Style TransferFig. 9 shows more comparisons of different serial schemes in artistic style transfer domain. As men-tioned in the paper, each column represents a serial scheme, and each row shows the intermediateA.2.2 Semantic Style TransferFig. 10	shows some comparisons of different serial schemes in semantic style transfer domain. Eachcolumn represents a serial scheme, and each row shows the intermediate output. We select (a)Champandard (2016), (b) Gu et al. (2018), (c) Liao et al. (2017), (d) Li et al. (2017b), (e) Shenget al. (2018), (f) Li et al. (2019) for the nodes of different serial schemes.
Figure 10: Comparisons of different serial schemes in semantic style transfer domain.
Figure 12: Varying weight ω1 of loss L1 and ω2 of loss L2 for artistic style transfer. The top rowshows the results obtained by fixing ω2, ω3 and λ at 10, 0 and 0, respectively, and increasing ω1from 0.01 to 10. The bottom row shows the results obtained by fixing ω1, ω3 and λ at 0.1, 0 and 0,respectively, and increasing ω2 from 1 to 50.
Figure 11: Comparisons of different serial schemes in photo-realistic style transfer domain.
Figure 13: Varying weight ω2 and λ of loss L2 for semantic style transfer. The top row shows theresults obtained by fixing ω1, ω3 and λ at 0.1, 0 and 0, respectively, and increasing ω2 from 0 to 100.
Figure 14: Varying weight ω3 of loss L3 for photo-realistic style transfer. The values of ω1, ω2 andλ are fixed at 0.1, 10 and 10, respectively.
Figure 15: Results obtained by our SST(a) scheme.
Figure 16: Results obtained by our SST(b) scheme.
Figure 17: Results obtained by our SST(c) scheme.
Figure 18: Results obtained by our PST scheme.
Figure 19: Results obtained by the method of Sheng et al. (2018)As shown in Fig. 19, this method can be used in artistic and semantic style transfer (without seg-mentation masks), but the stylistic quality is not so good. As we can see, for artistic style transfer, itonly transfers the global color of the style images, but lacks local patterns. For semantic style trans-fer, it may produce a lot of hazy blocks, which affect the overall clarity. These problems (includingcontent distortions and abnormal artifacts) also exist in the photo-realistic style transfer.
Figure 20: Results obtained by the method of Li et al. (2019)As shown in Fig. 20, this method can be used in artistic and photo-realistic style transfer. But since itprefers to maintain the structures of the content images, the produced results are often insufficientlystylized. This could help it to perform better in photo-realistic style transfer. On the other hand,since the spirit of this method is based on the global statistics, it cannot solve the tasks of semanticstyle transfer. This method is capable to use segmentation masks.
Figure 21: Results obtained by the method of Li & Wand (2016)As shown in Fig. 21, this method can be used in semantic style transfer (without segmentationmasks). As we can see, for artistic style transfer, it could transfer adequate local patterns of thestyle images, but the global effects of the stylized results are unsatisfying (mainly because of theinsufficient global color, see the left column). On the other hand, introduced content distortions alsolimit its capability for photo-realistic style transfer (see the right column).
Figure 22: Results obtained by the method of Champandard (2016)As shown in Fig. 22, this method can be used in artistic and semantic style transfer (with and withoutsegmentation masks). For artistic style transfer (see the left column), the most results are similar tothat of Li & Wand (2016), the difference is that this method can perform better on the global coloror the local patterns, but it is still unsatisfying. For semantic style transfer, it may produce blurredresults (e.g., the two cases at the top of the center column). For photo-realistic style transfer, itcannot adapt to this domain because of the introduced content distortions.
Figure 23: Results obtained by the method of Gu et al. (2018)As shown in Fig. 23, this method can be used in artistic and semantic style transfer (without seg-mentation masks). The stylized results produced by it can obtain sufficient global color and localpatterns, but there are also a lot of abnormal artifacts which directly affect the final effect. Thisoccurs in almost every case in these three domains.
Figure 24: Results obtained by the method of Liao et al. (2017)As shown in Fig. 24, this method can be used in semantic and photo-realistic style transfer (withoutsegmentation masks). It is more suitable for style transfer of image pairs which have high semantic-level correspondences. Therefore, for the cases of artistic style transfer which are not relevant insemantics, this method yields poor stylized results (see the left column). On the other hand, sincethis method does not support segmentation masks, mismatching is prone to occur in challengingtasks (e.g., the case at the top of the center column and cases in the right column).
Figure 25: Results obtained by the method of Luan et al. (2017)As shown in Fig. 25, similar to our SST(c) scheme (see Fig. 17), this method is only suitable forphoto-realistic style transfer. Compared to our SST(c) scheme, it may produce some abnormalartifacts, e.g., the hull and eyes in the two cases at the bottom of the right column, respectively. Thismethod is capable to use segmentation masks.
Figure 26: Results obtained by the method of Li et al. (2018)As shown in Fig. 26, similar to our SST(c) scheme (see Fig. 17) and the method of Luan et al. (2017)(see Fig. 25), this method is only suitable for photo-realistic style transfer. See the right column,compared to our SST(c) scheme, it may produce too many undesired effects, e.g., the skies in thecase 1 and case 3, the shadows in the case 2 and the eyes in the case 4 (numbers are arranged fromtop to bottom). This method is capable to use segmentation masks.
Figure 27: Results obtained by the method of Yao et al. (2019)As shown in Fig. 27, this method can be used in artistic and semantic style transfer (without seg-mentation masks). Because of the incorporation with self-attention mechanism, this method canhighlight more salient areas (e.g., characters’ eyes) of the images. But in other places, the perfor-mance is similar to the method of Sheng et al. (2018) (see Fig. 19).
Figure 28: Results obtained by the method of Gatys et al. (2016)As shown in Fig. 28, this method is only suitable for artistic style transfer. As we can see, it couldtransfer the global color and rough textures of the artistic style images to the content images (seethe left column). But since the spirt of its algorithm is based on the global statistics, this methodcannot solve the semantic style transfer (see the center column). Of course, without the improvementintroduced by Luan et al. (2017), it cannot solve the tasks of photo-realistic style transfer (see theright column).
Figure 29: Results obtained by the method of Huang & Belongie (2017)As shown in Fig. 29, similar to the method of Gatys et al. (2016) (see Fig. 28), this method isonly suitable for artistic style transfer. Compared to the method of Gatys et al. (2016), some resultsgenerated by it are not sufficiently stylized (e.g., the two cases at the bottom of the left column).
Figure 30: Results obtained by the method of Li et al. (2017b)As shown in Fig. 30, similar to the methods of Gatys et al. (2016) (see Fig. 28) and Huang &Belongie (2017) (see Fig. 29), this method is only suitable for artistic style transfer. Compared tothe methods of Gatys et al. (2016) and Huang & Belongie (2017), some results generated by it areexcessively stylized, thus introducing a lot of undesired effects (e.g., the case 2 and case 3 in the leftcolumn).
Figure 31: User preference result of ten style transfer methods for artistic style transfer.
Figure 32: (a) User preference result of ten style transfer methods for semantic style transfer. (b)User preference result of eight style transfer methods for photo-realistic style transfer.
