Figure 1: Deflected adversarial attacks on the SVHN dataset. These images were generated by adefense aware attack and the maximal adversarial perturbation is bounded by 16/255.
Figure 2: The network architecture with cycle-consistent winning capsule reconstructions.
Figure 3: An example of a clean input, an adversarial example generated Via a PGD attack, andthe reconstructions for the clean and adversarial inputs from each class capsule. The reconstructioncorresponding to the winning capsule is surrounded by a red box. Under each reconstruction is its'2 reconstruction error; the smallest reconstruction error is highlighted in red. Both the clean inputand its winning capsule reconstruction are classified as ’4'. The PGd attack is classified as the targetclass '3’ but its winning capsule reconstruction is classified as '4’.
Figure 4: The Undetected Rate of different detectors for white-box attacks versus False Positive Rate(FPR) for clean input on the SVHN dataset. “All” denotes GTD, LBD and CCD are all used to detectadversarial attacks. The better detection mechanism has a smaller FPR for clean input and smallerundetected rate for attacks.
Figure 5: The Undetected Rate for white-box and black-box attacks versus False Positive Rate (FPR)for clean input on the SVHN and CIFAR-10 datasets. The strongest attack has the largest area underthe line.
Figure 6: The human study re-suits on SVHN. The maximal '∞perturbation is 16/255.
Figure 7: Deflected adversarial attacks on SVHN and CIFAR-10. The maximal '∞ perturbation is 16/255 for SVHN and25/255 for CIFAR-10.
Figure 8: Successful but detected adversarial EAD attacks (on the left) and CW attacks (on the right)and the corresponding capsule reconstructions on SVHN. The first column is the clean input, thesecond column is the adversarial example, the third column is the winning-capsule reconstruction,the last ten columns are the reconstructions corresponding to class 0 to 9.
Figure 10: Successful but detected adversarial EAD attacks (on the left) and CW attacks (on the right)and the corresponding capsule reconstructions on CIFAR-10. The first column is the clean input, thesecond column is the adversarial example, the third column is the winning-capsule reconstruction,the last ten columns are the reconstructions corresponding to class 0 to 9.
Figure 11: Successful but detected adversarial PGD attacks (on the left) and our CC-PGD attacks(on the right) and the corresponding capsule reconstructions on CIFAR-10. The first column is theclean input, the second column is the adversarial example, the third column is the winning-capsulereconstruction, the last ten columns are the reconstructions corresponding to class 0 to 9. The maximal'∞ bound to the adversarial perturbation is 8/255.
