Figure 1: Left: First baseline model. The first neural network consists of encoder and decoder. En-coder takes in trajectories and encodes them into latent space. Decoder then takes the latent featurerepresentation and decodes them back to trajectories. Loss is calculated using MSE and propagatedback to both encoder and decoder. The second neural network receives in-game variables such asrelative position of a bird or initial forces and learns to predict values predicted by encoder. Thesevalues then serve as input to the decoder which predicts the actual trajectories. For the prediction ofunseen trajectories only the second neural network and the decoder are used. Right: Second baselinemodel. This model does not use observed trajectories and directly learns to predict the trajectoriesfrom initial forces or relative position of the physical object to the shooting mechanism.
Figure 2: Left: InferNet internal architecture. MLP 1 predicts a single value that represents agravity, while MLP 2 predicts a batch of values that represent initial velocities V0 and angles α foreach trajectory in the input batch. These values are then inserted to the projectile motion equation tocalculate the trajectory of the object. The predicted trajectory is then used to calculate the loss andupdate weights of both networks. Right: RelateNet internal architecture. MLP 1 predicts a batchof values that represent initial velocities V0 , while MLP 2 predicts a batch of values that representangles α for each trajectory in the input batch. The predicted values are then used to calculate theloss and update the weights of both networks.
Figure 3: Slingshot in Science Birds game and Basketball 3D shooter game.
Figure 4: Learned relationships between velocities and angle and relative position of a bird. Graphon the left side shows how initial angle between bird and center of a slingshot related to the initialangle of the trajectory. Graph on the right side shows how initial velocity is changing when increas-ing the distance between bird and center of the slingshot. In this example angle between bird andslingshot was fixed at 225 degrees.
Figure 5: Predicted and actual trajectories of a bird. Red line represent a predicted trajectory byPhysANet, while blue line represent a true trajectory taken by the bird. The first three trajectoriesare from test data set, whereas the last one is from generalization dataset.
Figure 6: Comparison of model’s abilities to transfer learned knowledge to Basketball 3D. The firsttwo pictures show predictions of one trajectory in x,y and z,y planes respectively. The rest of thepictures show predictions only in x,y plane. The first three pictures on the left show trajectoriespredicted by PhysANet, fourth picture shows a trajectory predicted by BM1, the last picture showsa trajectory predicted by BM2.
