Figure 1: BiologiCally-PlaUsible ACtor-CritiC with episodic memory framework. (Left) Compo-nents of a B-ACEM framework, based on biological connections and functions of the PFC (robustactive maintenance of task-relevant information), BG (dynamic gating of PFC active maintenance),DA (training the BG gating), Hippocampus (storing episodic memory). Sensory inputs are pro-cessed by PFC-BG circuit and corresponding motor signals are sent out by Thalamus (not shownhere). Working memory representations in PFC are updated via dynamic gating by the BG. Thesegating functions are learned by BG on the basis of modulatory input from dopaminergic neuron(blue dotted line), i.e., dopamine drives incremental learning (slow RL) in BG regions. Moreover,dopamine modulates episodic memories in the hippocampus, supporting adaptive behaviors (fastRL). The synaptic weights in the PFC-BG network are adjusted by an RL procedure, in which DAconveys a reward prediction error signal. (Right) The computational framework of B-ACEM.
Figure 2: (Left) Pipeline for Random Dots Motion Discrimination (RDMD) task. Monkeys aretrained to discriminate the direction of motion in a random dot stimulus that contained horizontalcoherent motion. After fixation (screen 1), the two choice targets appeared in the periphery (screen2). After a variable delay period, dynamic random dots appeared in a 5° diameter aperture (screen3). The monkey was allowed to make a saccadic eye movement to a choice target at any timeafter onset of random-dot motion to indicate the direction of perceived motion (screen 4). Reactiontime (RT) is defined as the elapsed time from motion onset to the initiation of the saccade, whichwas controlled by the monkeys and could be measured. (Right) Examples of random-dot motionstimulus of variable motion coherence. Stimulus strength is varied by changing the proportion ofdots moving coherently in a single direction, which determines the difficulty of the task. The lower(higher) the coherence levels, the more difficult (easier) the task is. Coherently moving dots are the“signal”, and randomly moving dots are the “noise”.
Figure 3: Behavior comparison of the animaland the agent during training in the RDMDtask reflected in psychometric functions (top)and chronimetric fucntions (bottom). The leftis animal behavioral data from one experience(reproduced from Roitman & Shadlen (2002)).
Figure 4: Learning curvesof the agent withepisodic memory (blue line) and without episodicmemory (orange line) on the RDMD task. (Left)Average reward per trial. (Right) Percent correct,for trials on which the network made a decision.
Figure 5: Learning curves of the agent on theRDMD task for different types of episodic mem-ory, such as salient memory (orange line), com-mon episodic memory (green line) and all typesof episodic memory (blue). (Left) Average rewardper trial. (Right) Percent correct.
