Figure 1: The overall architecture of our proposed pyramid non-local enhanced network (PNEN).
Figure 2: Architecture of prior non-local block (Wang et al., 2018) and our pyramid non-local block(PNB). In PNB, φk and gk are implemented with convolutional layers of different strides, while θ isshared. The kernel size k, number of filters f and stride S are indicated as (k,4 S) for each convolutionlayer.
Figure 3: Architecture of dilated residual block (DRB). Our proposed DRB contains five Conv-BN-ReLU-Conv groups, which have dilation factor 1, 2, 4, 2, 1, respectively.
Figure 4: Visual comparison of learning L0 smoothing filter. There exist unwanted details in previousmethods if we examine closely. In contrast, the result generated by our PNEN is closer to thegroundtruth.
Figure 5: Correlation map of pyramid non-local operation at different scales. The first row shows thecorrelation map computed at the red point. The second row shows correlation map computed at theblue point.
Figure 6: Correlation map of pyramid non-local operation at different scales. The first row shows thecorrelation map computed at the red point. The second row shows correlation map computed at theblue point.
Figure 7: Feature activation maps before and after applying pyramid non-local block.
Figure 8: Correlation map of pyramid non-local operation at different scales. The first row shows thecorrelation map computed at the red point. The second row shows correlation map computed at theblue point.
Figure 9: Feature activation maps before and after applying pyramid non-local block.
Figure 10: Baseline RDN architecture, and the enhanced RDN architecture by incorporating ourPNB.
Figure 11: Denoising Comparison. From left to right, they are the ground truth clean images, noisyimages, results generated by RDN and results generated by RDN with PNB, respectively.
Figure 12: Baseline MemNet architecture, and the enhanced MemNet architecture by incorporatingour PNB.
Figure 13: Super-resolution Comparison. From left to right, they are the groundtruth high-resolutionimages, bicubic-interpolated images, results generated by MemNet and results generated by MemNetwith PNB, respectively.
