Figure 1: Illustration of VIBI. (A) VIBI is composed of two parts: the explainer and approximator.
Figure 2:	The movie reviews and explanations provided by VIBI were randomly selected from thevalidation set. The selected words are colored red. Each word is used as a cognitive chunk and k = 5words are provided for each review.
Figure 3:	The hand-written digits and explanations provided by VIBI were randomly selected fromthe validation set. The selected patches are colored red if the pixel is activated (i.e. white) and yellowotherwise (i.e. black). A patch composed of 4 X 4 pixels is used as a cognitive chunk and k = 4patches are identified for each image.
Figure 4:	Black-box prediction scores of (A) VDJdb and (B) IEDB. (C) Black-box prediction scoresbetween the matched and unmatched instances from IEDB and (D) those by six epitope sequences.
Figure 5:	A survey example of MTurk evaluation on the LSTM movie sentiment prediction modelC.2 CNN digit recognition model using MNISTEvaluationTable 4: Evaluation of Interpretability on a 2d CNN digitrecognition model using MNIST.
Figure 6:	The hand-written digits and explanations provided by VIBI and the baselines. The examplesare randomly selected from the validation set. The selected patches are colored red if the pixel isactivated (i.e. white) and yellow otherwise (i.e. black). A patch composed of 4 × 4 pixels is used as acognitive chunk and k = 4 patches are identified for each image.
Figure 7:	A survey example of evaluation on the MNIST digit recognition model.
Figure 8: The hand-written digits and explanations provided by VIBI using various number of chunks(k). The examples are randomly selected from the validation set. The selected patches are coloredred if the pixel is activated (i.e. white) and yellow otherwise (i.e. black). A patch composed of 4 X 4pixels is used as a cognitive chunk and k = 4,6,10,20 patches are identified for each image.
Figure 9: The hand-written digits and explanations provided by VIBI using various chunk sizes. Thesame examples with Figure 8 are shown. The selected patches are colored red if the pixel is activated(i.e. white) and yellow otherwise (i.e. black). A patch composed of 4 X 4, 2 X 2,1 X 1 pixels is usedas a cognitive chunk.
