Figure 1: (a): Overview of the paper: embedding function f is trained jointly with either the compo-sition function g or the query function h. In particular, the goal is forg to “compose” the embeddingsof two examples, containing classes T and U respectively, to approximate the embedding of an ex-ample containing classes T ∪ U . (b): 2-D projection of the embedding space from Experiment 1on test classes and examples not seen during training (one-shot learning). Function g composes twoembeddings (two arrow tails) and maps the result back into the embedding space (arrow head). Tosubstantial if imperfect degree, the embedding space is compositional as described in (a).
Figure 2: Experiment 1. (a): Simulated audio signals. Each class is generated by a prototype wave-form. Each example is a noisy superposition of one or more prototypes. “Reference” examples areused for one-shot learning; “test” examples are used for evaluation. (b): Mean (std.dev.) accuracy(% correct) in inferring the label sets exactly (top 1), within the top 3, and the size of each label set.
Figure 3: Experiment 2. (a): Reference and test examples of OmniGlot images. (b): Mean accuracy(% correct) in inferring the label set of each example exactly (top 1), within the top 3, and the sizeof each label set. Results are computed on classes not seen during training (one-shot learning).
Figure 4: Experiment 4 (COCO): An example image (left) of two people, one talking on a cellphone, and the other wearing a backpack. The image is padded to form a square and then downscaled(a). The composite embedding (f & h) is computed and then queried about the presence of theobject in images (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) containing person, cell phone, backpack, truck, and oven,respectively. The query function h, when given the embeddings of image (a) and another image,should return True for (b),(c),(d) and False for (e),(f).
Figure 5: hDNN’s results according to the number of subclasses contained in images: Results ofimages contain more than 7 labeled objects are showed by dotted lines because they have fewer than100 samples in test set.
