Figure 1: HTM illustration. Top left: data collection. In this illustration, the task is to move agreen object between gray obstacles. Data consists of multiple obstacle configurations (contexts),and images of random movement of the object in each configuration. Bottom left: the elementsof HTM. A CVAE is trained to hallucinate images of the object and obstacles conditioned on theobstacle image context. A connectivity energy model is trained to score pairs of images based onthe feasibility of their transition. Right: HTM visual planning. Given a new context image and apair of start and goal images, we first use the CVAE to hallucinate possible images of the objectand obstacles. Then, a connectivity graph (blue dotted lines) is computed based on the connectivityenergy, and we plan for the shortest path from start to goal on this graph (orange solid line). Forexecuting the plan, a visual servoing controller is later used to track the image sequence.
Figure 2: Block wall domain (left) and block wall with complex obstacle (right) domain. The toprow shows some example contexts. The bottom rows show example observations.
Figure 3: Left: HTM plan examples (top) and Visual Foresight (green pixel distance) plan examples(bottom). Note Visual Foresight is unable to conduct a long-horizon plan, and thus greedily movesin the direction of the goal state. Right: Comparison of score function and edge weighting functionby examining final average distance to the goal state for 10 test start/goal pairs (the lower the better).
Figure 4: HTM plan examples. The hallucination allows the planner to imagine how to go aroundthe wall even though it has not seen the context before.
Figure 5: Visual Foresight plan examples. The plans do not completely show the trajectory to thegoal.
Figure 6: Sample observations (top) and contexts (bottom). In this domain, an object can be trans-lated and rotated (SE(2)) slightly per timestep. The data are collected from 360 different objectshapes with different number of building blocks between 3 to 7. Each object is randomly initialized50 times and each episode has length 30. The goal is to plan a manipulation of an unseen objectthrough the narrow gap between obstacles in zero-shot.
Figure 7: HTM evaluated on real data. Ground truth start and goal are the leftmost and rightmostimages, respectively, in the row.
Figure 8: SPTM evaluated on real data. Ground truth start and goal are the leftmost and rightmostimages, respectively, in the row.
Figure 9: HTM evaluated on hallucinated data. Ground truth start and goal are the leftmost andrightmost images, respectively, in the row.
