Figure 1:	Accuracy and topological features show weak correlation (Pearson’s r, significancep < 0.05) across a: Datasets b: Models. Finer granularity (per dataset per model) versions are inAppendix Csparse (D < 10-3), (Amazon Photograph and Computers) show slightly better connectivity propertiesthrough long-tailed degree and coreness distributions. This increased connectivity did not affect theperformance. These are supported by a visual analysis and MWU test which shows significance(p < 0.001) in Coauthor Physics, Pubmed, and Coauthor Computers networks. In concordance withour intuition models that showed a positive mean-accuracy correlation with coreness, closeness andeccentricity also displayed moderate negative correlation (0.2 < |r| < 0.4, p < 0.05) with the σ ofthe accuracy.
Figure 2:	a: Test accuracy for GCNs and GATs for graphs with varying number of componentsretained. Both models are robust upto a critical breakdown limit. b: Mean test accuracy percomponent against its size. Only components other than the largest component are included in theplot. Similar patterns are shown by all GraphSAGE models so only GraphSAGE-mean is shown.
Figure 3: a: Mean accuracy of perturbed graphs with varying number of edges added. Lowerthresholds imply more edges and more noise. b: Correlation between test accuracy and statistics oftopological features for each model; only correlations with r ≥ 0.40 andp < 0.05 are shown. Noticehow the dependence on global statistics of topological characteristics increases drastically.
Figure 4: Accuracy for different shuffle scenarios. We see that shuffling within partitions imposed byclass labels (ISO-CL and ISO-CL-DEG) leads to better results. The grid-y-axis indicates differentdatasets and the grid-x-axis different model types. The x-axis shows different constraint scenariosand the y-axis is accuracy scaled logarithmically. The error bars indicate standard deviation acrossruns.
Figure 5: The mean accuracy in when all the attributes are retained but the edge set is augmented orreduced. Edges identified by high correlation between attribute vectors are added or removed fromthe edge set. We see a clear decrease in performance on adding correlation. Subtracting commonedges removes additional redundancy and decreases performance further.
Figure 6: An expanded list of all correlations datasets and models. Accuracy and topological featuresshow weak correlation (Pearsons r) even across these. However as the number of points decreaseswith increasing granularity there is lower confide1n4ce (p) in these results.
Figure 7: Graphs constructed based on 4 possible cases arise depending on whether higher or lowervariance features are retained and whether the remainder are discarded out of hand or used to createedges before discarding. The original graph on the left with attribute vectors next to each node.
