Figure 1: (a) Multi branched architecture, task specific branches on a top of a shared backbone,induces capacity and destructive interference problems, force careful tuning. Recently proposedarchitectures: (b) using tasks specific modules and (c) using channel-wise modulation modules. (d)Our architecture: a top-down image-aware full tensor modulation network with no task specificmodules.
Figure 2: Images examples with their corresponding tasks. Our architecture benefits from its built-in image-aware, task dependent, localized attention mechanism. (a) M-MNIST examples, the tasksare to recognize the digits by their location. (b) CLEVR example, an example task is to determinewhether there is a sphere to the right of a cylinder. (c) CUB200 example, an example task is toclassify the bird’s neck color.
Figure 3: Several types of modulation modules, the trainable parameters are illustrated in yellow.
Figure 4: (a) Multi-MNIST accuracy scatter plot, top-right is better. We show higher accuraciesthan the single-task baseline while using much less parameters (b) Multi-MNIST: Typical trainingcurves, we show better accuracy than the single-task baseline along the training (c), (d) A close lookinto the network decision making process; (b) good example: the crown area is well localized andthe prediction follows the ground truth, (c) an error example: the breast isn’t localized well enough.
Figure 5: Architectures used in the two-classes multi-MNIST experiment: (a) Multi-branched archi-tecture (b) Ours top-down modulation architecture. The number of parameters in each architectureare summarized in table 5a.
Figure 6: More qualitative examples to demonstrate our ability to identify the relevant regions thatmost affected the network prediction. In all of these images the target part (the task, shown in theupper part of each image), is precisely localized and the prediction (shown in the lower part of eachimage) follows the ground truth. Best viewed in color while zoomed in.
Figure 7: Error cases. Left images demonstrate good examples, counted as failure cases due toannotations errors. Our network successfully localize the asked part and correctly predict its color.
