Figure 1: (a) Graphical Model of the multi-task dynamical system. (b) Right elbow joint duringhuman locomotion measured in (top) vertical, and (bottom) horizontal directions, obtained varying zbetween ‘childlike’ (blue) and ‘proud’ (red) styles.
Figure 2: (a) Example DHO data for N = 4 training sequences and two test sequences. (b) Samplesfrom the MTLDS trained on the 4 sequences in 2a, conditioned on the shaded region of test sequence1 up to t = 15. (c) Posterior predictive density of the same data and model at t = 30. Posterior meanand 95% C.I. shown in orange, true values shown in dotted blue. (d) Posterior mean and C.I. for thesecond test sequence.
Figure 3: (a) Mocap Experiment 1: out-of-sample MSE by % of training set seen. The performanceachieved by the GRU models for the entire training set is shown as the ‘Optimal’ dashed line. (b)Experiment 2: MSE performance (avg over LOO), truncated for clarity, see supp. mat. for the fullrange. (c) Experiment 3: Classifier probability of target style averaged over all input styles.
Figure 4: k = 2 mean embedding of each se-quence segment, coloured by its (unseen) tasklabel.
Figure 5: Distribution of random variables for DHO data generation.
Figure 6: Example data sampled from DHO model.
Figure 7: Marginal likelihood of DHO generating distribution under MTLDS models learned fromN examples. Boxes show median, IQR and whiskers show most extreme point within 1.5× IQRabove/below each box. True value shown as (uppermost) dotted line. The RHS panel is rescaled toshow the upper end of the plot with Bayes Factor interpretations overlaid.
Figure 8: Improvement in predictive performance over time seen (x-axis) for the DHO experiments.
Figure 9: (a) The 21-joint skeleton. (b) Eulerian representation. (c) Lagrangian representation. (d)Example of rotating towards the outside of a Corner.
Figure 10:	Per style MSE of Experiment 1.
Figure 11:	Results for Experiment 2 for all models on (a) truncated scale, (b) log scale.
Figure 12: Per style MSE of Experiment 2.
Figure 13: Average classification accuracy for style transfer using inputs from source style (columns)and latent code z from target style (rows). There is no style transfer on the diagonal. (a) Results formodel with MT bias only. (b) Results for full MTDS model.
Figure 14: Average classification accuracy for style transfer where only a single source input is usedfor each (source, target) pair. The configuration of the matrix is the same as Figure 13. (a) Results formodel with MT bias only. (b) Results for full MTDS model.
