Figure 1: Z as a function of α and no (left - computedfrom equation 7) and as a function of A and no (right -computed from equation 7 and inverting equation 10 fromthe Appendix A.1).
Figure 2: (Left) Accuracy and Z as a function of number of layers for a fixed parameter budgetusing a simple MLP on PCA whitened CIFAR10. The top axis shows the corresponding numberof neurons of the first layer (n0). The multiple points for each model are the accuracy values atepochs 5, 10, 15, 30 and 50 for the optimal choice of initialisation and learning rate. The solid linerepresents Z calculated assuming linear growth of effective neurons (equation 3). (Right) Varianceof PCA decomposition of the test set features at different layers depth of the best performing MLP(largest Z on the left panel). The effective dimensionality of the representation grows from 100(input) to 200 (output) gradually using all the available neurons.
Figure 3: Accuracy and Z as a function of depthΛ using a simple CNN on FashionMNIST (Xiaoet al., 2017). The multiple points represent theresults from epochs between 10 and 30. The solidline is Z calculated with equation 3.
Figure 4: (left) Accuracy and Z for different values of the r ratio on a DenseNet-BC bottleneck blockon CIFAR-10+ (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009). The horizontal axis r denotes the ratio of number oflayers between the 1 × 1 convolution and the 3 × 3 convolution. The graph at the bottom shows thenumber of model parameters as a function ofr. The green line shows the value for Z as a function ofr, where the peak is reached for r ≈ 4.5, as predicted in Sec. 2.3 (3 for DenseNet-Dense-BCjight).
Figure 5: The DenseNet-DenseBC architecture and experimental results.
Figure 6: This example shows the rules to calculate the con-tribution to the total number of paths given by each layer ina NN. Each Ni can be ≤ than the corresponding channels inthe NN.
Figure 7: In the left panel, the dashed lines represent different solutions of the differential equationobtained by maximising Z locally, with the same n(0) and different v(0). The solution for optimalglobal Z is the thick grey line. The exponential approximation from Sec. 2.2 (i.e., n(λ) = n0eαλ) isthe solid black line. In the right panel, the dots represent the depths Λ and the corresponding valuesof Z of the solutions of the left panel. The diamond represents the exponential approximationsolution.
