Figure 1: (left) Overhead and (right) first-person view from the car camera, of the Duckietown-baseddriving environment.
Figure 2: Evaluation of the average maximum reward and average total boundary collisions atdifferent target car widths.
Figure 3: Evaluation of the reward over time at six different car width domains. For every evaluation,we perform ten adaptation steps, with one initial evaluation before adaptation starts. Each calculatedreward is calculated by taking the maximum reward seen so far at each timestep, where the value atthat timestep is averaged over ten evaluations. This maximum is then averaged over ten initializationsfor each model. Standard errors are shown with colored bars.
Figure 4: Evaluation of the total number of boundary collisions over time at six different car widthdomains. The maximum number of collisions is 60, as there are 6 evaluations steps (1 beforeadaptation starts, 5 during) and at each evaluation step 10 evaluations are performed. This cumulativetotal is averaged over ten initializations for each model. Standard errors are shown with colored bars.
Figure 5: How well does the pretrained dynamics model capture the epistemic uncertainty due tounknown car width? These overhead views present the trajectories predicted by the dynamics model(thin curves in desaturated colors) for a given starting state of the car and a specific action sequence.
Figure 6: Evaluation of the average maximum reward and average total boundary collisions at differenttarget car widths. (similar to Fig 2, but with a small, fixed number of pretraining environments.)A	The Effect of Finite Pretraining EnvironmentsIn the main paper, we perform experiments where we sample the car width dynamically at thebeginning of each pretraining episode, from the full pretraining range (width 0.05 to 0.099), so thatthere are effectively an infinite number of pretraining environments available to sample from. A morerealistic situation might involve having a fixed, small number of pretraining environments, amongwhich we select one at random for each pretraining episode.
Figure 7: How do the dynamics model’s predicted trajectories evolve over pretraining time? Theseplots demonstrate the predicted trajectories for a fixed action sequence at different stages of RADApretraining, starting at the first episode of training after the initial random rollouts.
