Figure 1: Generated samples by an instance of the proposed PolyGAN. (a) Generated samples usinga fourth-order polynomial and (b) the corresponding generated samples when removing the termsthat correspond to the fourth-order. As evidenced, by extending the polynomial terms, PolyGANgenerates samples with an increasing level of detail.
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the Coupled CP decomposition (for third order approximation).
Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the Coupled nested CP decomposition (for third order approxima-tion). Symbol * refers to the Hadamard product.
Figure 4: Synthesized data for learning the rx, sin xs signal. No activation functions are used inthe generators. From left to right: (a) the data distribution, (b) ‘Orig’, (c) ‘Concat’, (d) PolyGAN.
Figure 5:	Synthesized data for MNIST with a single activation in the generator. From left to right: (a)The ground-truth signals, (b) ‘Orig’, (c) ‘Concat’, (d) PolyGAN.
Figure 6:	Conditional digit generation. Note that both ‘Orig’ and ‘Concat’ suffer from severe modecollapse (details in section 4.2). On the contrary, PolyGAN synthesizes digits that have differentthickness (e.g. 9), style (e.g. 2) and rotation (e.g. 1).
Figure 7: Synthesized data for learning the ‘astroid’ signal. No activation functions are used in thegenerators.
Figure 8: Experiment on 3D synthetic data. From left to right: (a) the data distribution, (b) ‘Orig’, (c)‘Concat’, (d) PolyGAN. As expected, the ‘Orig’ and the ‘Concat’ cannot capture the data distribution.
Figure 9:	Experiment on 3D synthetic data (‘swiss roll’). From left to right: (a) the data distribution,(b) ‘Orig’, (c) ‘Concat’, (d) PolyGAN.
Figure 10:	Synthesized data on ‘Gabriel’s Horn’. From left to right: (a) the data distribution, (b)‘Orig’, (c) ‘Concat’, (d) PolyGAN.
Figure 11: Image generation on faces (YaleB (Georghiades et al., 2001)) for a generator with linearblocks and a single activation function only on the output (i.e., tan h). Notice that our method canilluminate either the left or right part of the face, in contrast to ‘Orig’ (and ‘Concat’) which generateimages that have a dark side only on the left (respectively right) side. In addition, both ‘Orig’ and‘Concat’ fail to capture the fine details of the facial structure (please zoom in for the details).
Figure 12: Conditional image generation on CIFAR10 for a generator with linear blocks and a singleactivation function. Our approach generates more realistic samples in comparison to the comparedmethods, where severe mode collapse also takes place.
Figure 13: Synthesized data for learning the rx, sinpxqs signal. No activation functions are usedin the generators. From left to right: (a) the data distribution, (b) Coupled CP decomposition, (c)Coupled nested CP decomposition.
Figure 14: Synthesized data for learning the Astroid. Both models generate only plausible examples.
Figure 15: Experiment on 3D synthetic data. From left to right: (a) the data distribution, (b) CoupledCP decomposition, (c) Coupled nested CP decomposition.
Figure 16: Experiment on 3D synthetic data (‘swiss roll’). From left to right: (a) the data distribution,(b) Coupled CP decomposition, (c) Coupled nested CP decomposition. Note that Coupled CPdecompositiongenerates some noisy samples in contrast to Coupled nested CP decomposition.
Figure 17: Comparison of the two decompositions on digit generation.
