Figure 1: Example of a path (blackdashed arrow) found across indepen-dent trajectories (colored lines) froman initial state (gray circle) to a goalstate (blue square), with learned lo-cal metric creating new connections.
Figure 2: Simulated 2D navigation envi-ronments. We use these domains to illus-trate the various properties of our method.
Figure 3: (1) Local metric score in comparison to ground-truth L2 distance with predictedneighbors in red. (2) Trajectories given in the dataset. (3) Points from different trajectoriesare connected by generalizing the local-metric function. Out-of-training-set Connectionsshown in red. (4) Step sequence in C-Maze, learned via Plan2Vec. Gray dashed circle isthe goal position. Red dot is the planned next step (1-step), greedy w.r.t the global metricfunction being learned. Blue dots are the neighbors sampled using the local metric function.
Figure 4: Learned Embedding with VAE (top row) vsPlan2Vec (bottom row). The columns correspond to theOpen Room, Table, and C-Maze domains. Representationlearned by the VAE is wrapped globally. Whereas Plan2Veclearns a globally coherent embedding. In C-Maze, the twoends of the tunnel are further apart, correctly reflecting thedecrease in reachability between those points.
Figure 5: (left and middle)Difference in learned globalmetric on Open Room andC-Maze. The goal used toquery the value map is in-dicated by the dashed cir-cle. (right) shows the agentgetting around the wall withthe learned embedding (blue),whereas a Euclidean plannergets stuck.
Figure 6: Left: Comparison of Plan2Vec with full SPTM and a random baseline for varyingplan lengths. Center: Comparison of Plan2Vec with DQN in terms of sample efficiency. Right:Comparison of computation time of Plan2Vec and Dijkstra’s.
Figure 7: A visualizationof the three datasets Tiny,Small, and Medium usedin our experiments.
Figure 8: Histogram of number of neighbors per node, with visualized examples. Originalnodes are left of the red dashed line and out of trajectory neighbors are outlined in orange.
Figure 9: Example of visual plan generated by Plan2Vec on the Rope Domain showingsteps coming from two different trajectories (8 and 3). Each transition only perturbs theconfiguration of the rope locally. The numbers above denote the trajectory and time stepthe image is from, the number below represents the score by the local metric fφ .
