Figure 1: (A) Example segmentation patches (left column) and protein expressions (other columns).
Figure 2: Examples generated from a segmentation for certain channels for different models. Thesegmentation patch is the one hot encoded patch collapsed and colored into 1 channel. The horizon-tal labels represent protein markers and the vertical labels are each of the generative models.
Figure 3: CCIGANWe use SPADE residual blocks (Park et al., 2019) as our generative backbone and DCGAN’s dis-criminator’s architecture (Figure 3, A.1) (Radford et al., 2015). Park et al. (2019) have shownSPADE to be an effective way to inject conditioning into a generative model. The SPADE nor-malization layer serves as a replacement for previous layer normalization techniques. Instead oflearning a universally shared per channel affine transformation, like in Batch Normalization (Ioffe& Szegedy, 2015) or Instance Normalization (Ulyanov et al., 2016), SPADE learns to predict affinetransformations based on segmentation maps; each feature is uniquely transformed based on itscell type, size, and neighboring cells. The ability for SPADE to modulate activations based on thecontext of adjacent cell segmentations allows the network to effectively model the behaviors andinteractions of cells. The input of CCIGAN is a noise vector z ∈ R128 and a segmentation map S.
Figure 4: Attention module. This illustrates an instance, focusing on the light blue block C1.
Figure 5: Example illustration of how a CD8T cell’s (orange) PD-1 histogram changes asa function of iteratively added tumor cells.
Figure 6: An example illustration of the center of mass (COM) nomenclature from section 5.1. Notethe projection onto the CD8 T cell. This provides a more consistent measurement across differentpatches by projecting pTumor onto the CD8 T cell.
Figure 7: Process of iteratively adding tumor cells. The added red cells are tumor cells (PD-L1) andthe center orange cell indicates a CD8 T cell (cell of interest, PD-1). For this process, we focus oneach instance of an added tumor.
Figure 8: An example illustration of the points and vector nomenclature from section 5.2. The bluedots are the expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins. The cyan arrows show the vectors vt and ut .
Figure 9: CCIGAN experiment for adding CD8 T cells and tumor cells (control) around a tumorcell.
Figure 10: SPADE experiment for adding CD8 T cells and tumor cells (control) around a tumor cell.
Figure 11: pix2pixHD experiment for adding CD8 T cells and tumor cells (control) around a tumorcell.
Figure 12: CycleGAN experiment for adding CD8 T cells and tumor cells (control) around a tumorcell.
Figure 13: Persistent vectors s for various channels.
Figure 14: Uncertainty maps illustrating model generativeness.
