Figure 1: Decision Boundaries as Geometric Structures. The decision boundaries B (in red) comprise twolinear pieces separating classes C1 and C2. As per Theorem 2, the dual subdivision of this single hidden neuralnetwork is the convex hull between the zonotopes ZG1 and ZG2. The normals to the dual subdivison δ(R(x))are in one-to-one correspondence to the tropical hypersurface T (R(x)), which is a superset to the decisionboundaries B. Note that some of the normals to δ(R(x)) (in red) are parallel to the decision boundaries.
Figure 2: Effect of Different Initializations on the Decision Boundaries Polytope. From left to right:training dataset, decision boundaries polytope of original network followed by the decision boundaries polytopeduring several iterations of pruning with different initializations.
Figure 3: Tropical Pruning Pipeline. Pruning the 4th node, or equivalently removing the two yellow verticesof zonotope ZG2 does not affect the decision boundaries polytope which will not lead to any change in accuracy.
Figure 4: Results of Tropical Pruning. Pruning-accuracy plots for AlexNet (top) and VGG16 (bottom)trained on SVHN, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100, pruned with our tropical method and three other pruning methods.
Figure 5: Dual View of Tropical Adversarial Attacks. We show the effects of tropical adversarial attacks ona synthetic binary dataset at two different input points (in black). From left to right: the decision regions of theoriginal and perturbed models, and decision boundaries polytopes (green for original and blue for perturbed).
Figure 6: Effect of Tropical Adversarial Attacks on MNIST Dataset. We show qualitative examples ofadversarial attacks, produced by solving Problem (5), on two digits (8,9) from MNIST. From left to right,images are classified as [8,7,5,4] and [9,7,5,4] respectively.
Figure 7: Changes in Functional Zonotopes and Decision Boundaries Polytope. First column:decision boundaries polytope, rest of the columns are the geometrical representation of the func-tional form of the network. Under different pruning iterations using class blind, we can spot thechanges that affected the tropical geometric representation of the functional form of the network(zonotopes) while the shape of the decision boundaries polytope is unaffected.
Figure 8: Effect of Different Initializations on the Decision Boundaries Polytope. From left to right:training dataset, decision boundaries polytope of original network followed by the decision boundaries polytopeduring several iterations of pruning with different initializations.
Figure 9: Effect of Different Initializations on the Decision Boundaries Polytope. From left to right:training dataset, decision boundaries polytope of original network followed by the decision boundaries polytopeduring several iterations of pruning with different initializations.
Figure 10: Results of Tropical Pruning with Fine Tuning the Biases of the Classifier. Tropicalpruning applied on AlexNet and VGG16 trained on SVHN, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 against differentpruning methods with fine tuning the biases of the classifier only.
Figure 11: Results of Tropical Pruning with Fine Tuning the Biases of the Network. Tropicalpruning applied on AlexNet and VGG16 trained on SVHN, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 against differentpruning methods with fine tuning the biases of the network.
Figure 12: Dual View of Tropical Adversarial Attacks. Effect of tropical adversarial attack ona synthetic dataset with two classes in two different scenarios for the black input point. From leftto right: decision boundaries of Original model, perturbed model and decision boundaries poly-topes(green for original model and blue for perturbed model).
Figure 13: Effect of Tropical Adversarial Attacks on MNIST Images. First row from the left:Clean image, perturbed images classified as [7,3,2,1,0] respectively. Second row from left: Cleanimage, perturbed images classified as [9,8,7,3,2] respectively. Third row from left: Clean image,perturbed images classified as [9,8,7,5,3] respectively. Fourth row from left: Clean image, perturbedimages classified as [9,4,3,2,1] respectively. Fifth row from left: Clean image, perturbed imagesclassified as [8,4,3,2,1] respectively.
