Figure 1: A diagram illustrating the concept of stiffness. it can be viewed in two equivalent ways: a)as the change in loss at a datapoint induced by the application of a gradient update based on anotherdatapoint, and b) the alignment of loss gradients computed at the two datapoints.
Figure 2: The evolution of training and validation loss (left panel), within-class stiffness (centralpanel) and between-classes stiffness (right panel) during training. The onset of over-fitting is markedin orange. After that, both within-class and between-classes stiffness regress to 0. The same effectis visible in stiffness measured between two training set datapoints, one training and one validationdatapoint, and two validation set datapoints.
Figure 3: Class membership dependence of stiffness for a CNN on FASHION MNIST at 4 differentstages of training. The figure shows stiffness between train-train, train-val and val-val pairs ofimages, as well as the sign and cosine metrics.
Figure 4: Stiffness as a function of epoch. The plots summarize the evolution of within-class andbetween-classes stiffness measures as a function of epoch of training for a CNN on FASHIONMNIST.
Figure 5: Stiffness between images of the same class as a function of their input space distance for4 different stages of training of a CNN on FASHION MNIST.
Figure 6: The effect of learning rate on the stiffness dynamical critical scale 両 - the input spacedistance between images over which stiffness disappears. The upper part shows 両 for 5 differentlearning rates as a function of epoch, while the lower part shows it as a function of training loss inorder to be able to compare different learning rates fairly. The larger the learning rate, the smallerthe stiff domains.
Figure 7: Class-membership dependence of stiffness for a CNN on MNIST at 4 different stages oftraining.
Figure 8: Class-membership dependence of stiffness for a CNN on CIFAR-10 at 4 different stagesof training.
Figure 9: Stiffness between images of the same class as a function of their input space distance for4 different stages of training of a fully-connected network (FC) on FASHION MNIST.
Figure 10: Stiffness between images of the same class as a function of their input space distance for4 different stages of training of a CNN on CIFAR-10.
Figure 11: The effect of learning rate on the stiffness dynamical critical scale 両 - the input spacedistance between images over which stiffness disappears. The upper part shows 両 for 5 differentlearning rates as a function of epoch, while the lower part shows it as a function of training loss inorder to be able to compare different learning rates fairly. The larger the learning rate, the smallerthe stiff domains.
