Figure 1: A structure representation enables machine learning of multi-agent data. (Left) Data-Points are colored according to the agent identity (letters denote agents in a given frame). (Right)By learning and aligning data to a formation template, We represent agents in a consistent vectorform conducive to learning. Agents are now ordered by the role to which they are assigned.
Figure 2: An overview of the proposed method. The procedure consists of ⑴ Normalization, (2)Initialization, (3) Reshaping, (4) Formation Discovery, (5) Template Alignment, (6) Role Assign-ment, (7) Template Clustering. In the role assignment step, the template distributions are shownas unfilled thick ellipses and the observed distributions of the role-aligned data are shown as thetextured ellipses.
Figure 3: (A) Difference in the per sample log-likelihood under the template learned calculated viahard-assignment and the current method. All of the values are positive demonstrating the formationlearned under the current method always captures the data better. (B) Template-based alignmentproduces a more compressed representation of the data than an identity-based representation. Left:reconstruction error as a function of the number of clusters. Right: variance accounted for as afunction of the number of eigenvectors used. In both Role.current corresponds to the method ofthe current work Rolehard (often directly under Role_current) corresponds the hard-assignmentapproach.
Figure 4: Impact of initialization and key-frame selection. (A) Player-mean initialization (red)enables the K-Means initialization to run to convergence in fewer iterations than random (blue)initialization. (B) Learning the formation on event-only “key-frames” (thick line, no hashing) resultsin formations which are very similar to the formations learned on all data (thin line, hashing), butruns significantly faster due the reduced data size and is less prone to find spurious optima. Left: Anaverage example showing the formations learned on the two sets of data are very similar. Right: Anunusual “bad” example showing more disagreement between the two data sets.
Figure 5: Context-specific templates. (A) We trained distinct templates of a given team while attack-ing and defending against certain modes (aka. "styles”)of play. Data is aggregated over multiplegames across the season. (B) We trained distinct templates of a given team while defending duringthe last 10 minutes of the games while trailing and leading, both home and away. Here We haveadded back in the average team (i.e. group) position to show the overall positioning on the pitch.
Figure 6: Discovered templates for each team across a season of professional soccer. The globaltemplate is learned by selecting data randomly across the season (all teams, all games). Each plotcorresponds to a team and a template is learned for each half of every game and aligned to the globaltemplate. The centroids of each role-distribution are plotted in black.
