Figure 1:  Example of nano-porous structures with corresponding heat flux shown using a colorgradient. Yellow regions indicate high phonons flux. The thermal conductivity κ and von Mises stressσ are reported below each structure. The arrows show the moving directions of the pores. (Left) Arandom sample. (Middle) The sample obtained by Taylor-Reg PMLC starting from the left structurewith κ constraint. (Right) The sample obtained by Taylor-Reg PMLC with both κ and σ constraints.
Figure 2: Comparison of the surrogate variants in testing RMSE. (Left) prediction accuracy for the thermalconductivity κ. (Right) prediction accuracy for mechanical stability σ. Note the difference in scale of κ and σ.
Figure 3: Comparison of the surrogate models in RMSE on the same test set when the training size is varied.
Figure  4:  Samples  from  by  Zero-order  PLMC  (left),  Taylor-1  PLMC  (middle)  and  the  hybridalgorithm of Zero-order and Taylor-1 PLMC (right). All are run with the κ constraint.
Figure 5:  Example of nano-porous structures with corresponding heat flux shown using a colorgradient. Yellow regions indicate high phonons flux. The thermal conductivity κ and von Mises stressσ are reported below each structure.  The arrows show the moving directions of the pores.  (Left)A random sample.  (Middle) The sample obtained by Taylor-Reg ProxLMC starting from the leftstructure with κ constraint. (Right) The sample obtained by Taylor-Reg ProxLMC with both κ and σconstraints.
Figure 6:  Example of nano-porous structures with corresponding heat flux shown using a colorgradient. Yellow regions indicate high phonons flux. The thermal conductivity κ and von Mises stressσ are reported below each structure. The arrows show the moving directions of the pores. (Left) Arandom sample. (Middle) The sample obtained by Taylor-1 ProxLMC starting from the left structurewith κ constraint. (Right) The sample obtained by Taylor-1 ProxLMC with both κ and σ constraints.
Figure 7:  Example of nano-porous structures with corresponding heat flux shown using a colorgradient. Yellow regions indicate high phonons flux. The thermal conductivity κ and von Mises stressσ are reported below each structure.  The arrows show the moving directions of the pores.  (Left)A random sample.  (Middle) The sample obtained by Zero-order ProxLMC starting from the leftstructure with κ constraint. (Right) The sample obtained by Zero-order ProxLMC with both κ and σconstraints.
