Figure 1: The workflow for generating our adversarial examples.
Figure 2:  Illustration of the proportional clipping process.   Two boundary lines in yellow in (b)which we name Upper Sideline (USL) and Lower Sideline (LSL) respectively, are calculated fromthe original waveform (a).  The line in green in (c) is the disturbed waveform with the perturbationbased on Opt.  We clip the disturbed waveform in green in (c) at those positions where the soundintensity exceeds the USL or LSL , as shown in (d).  The modified waveform in current iterationafter our proportional clipping is displayed in red in (e).
Figure 3: The perturbation at the positions with low sound intensity (left), medium sound intensity(middle) and high sound intensity (right) in time domain.
Figure 4:  The perturbation at the positions with human sensitive frequency band (left) and highfrequency band (right).
Figure 5: (a) Trends of L2 Distortion and epoch as the intensity width gets narrower. (b) Word ErrorRate and Character Error Rate of audio examples.
Figure 6: The original audio(left), Opt based adversarial example (middle) and IPC based adversarialexample (right) in time domain.
Figure 7: The perturbation at the positions with low sound intensity (left), medium sound intensity(middle) and high sound intensity (right) in time domain.
Figure 8:  The perturbation at the positions with human sensitive frequency band (left) and highfrequency band (right).
Figure 9: The original audio(left), Opt based adversarial example (middle) and IPC based adversarialexample (right) in time domain.
Figure 10: The perturbation at the positions with low sound intensity (left), medium sound intensity(middle) and high sound intensity (right) in time domain.
Figure 11:  The perturbation at the positions with human sensitive frequency band (left) and highfrequency band (right).
Figure 12:  This figure displays an STFT of an audio file, our perturbation of the audio file, Opt’sperturbation of the audio file. The red elliptical area shows less noise in silent periods than Opt.
Figure 13:  This figure displays an STFT of an audio file, our perturbation of the audio file, Opt’sperturbation of the audio file.  The red elliptical area shows different frequency components at acertain timestamp.
