Figure 1: Visualization of FAB-attack scheme, with on the left the case η = 1, on the rightη > 1. In blue we represent the next iterate x(i+1) one would get without any bias towardthe original point xorig , in green the effect of the bias we introduce and in red the x(i+1)obtained with our scheme in (10). We see that our algorithm tends to stay closer to theoriginal point compared to the one with an unbiased gradient step.
Figure 2: Ablation study to DeepFool for l∞-attacks. The introduction of the convexcombination (Qmax = 0.1, no backward step) already improves over DeepFool. Moreover,if one does our full approach, the case Qmax = 0 (can be seen as an improved iterativeDeepFool) is worse than Qmax = 0.1 with the same number of restarts. In the plots we showthe robust accuracy as a function of the threshold e under the different attacks on the l∞-ATmodel on MNIST.
Figure 3: We plot for different step sizes of PGD robust accuracy over iterations. In red thestep size we used in the experiments of Section 3. We clearly see that our chosen step-sizeis on average the best one. The models used are those trained on MNIST (top row) andCIFAR-10 (bottom row).
Figure 4: Evolution of accuracy across iterations on MNIST. We compare the robust accuracyof PGD-1 (magenta) and FAB-1 (black) as a function of the employed forward/backwardpasses in the algorithm (one iteration of PGD corresponds to 2 passes, one iteration of FABcorresponds to 3 passes). Models: plain in the first column, l∞-at in the second and l2-atin the third. Threat models: l∞ in the first row, l2 in the second and l1 in the third. Thethresholds e used can be read above the plots. Note that the result of FAB-1 on l∞-at Wrt 11does not match that in Table 6 due to a typo in the statistics in the table.
Figure 5: Evolution of accuracy across iterations on CIFAR-10. We compare the robust accu-racy of PGD-1 (magenta) and FAB-1 (black) as a function of the employed forward/backwardpasses in the algorithm (one iteration of PGD corresponds to 2 passes, one iteration of FABcorresponds to 3 passes). Models: plain in the first column, l∞-at in the second and l2-atin the third. Threat models: l∞ in the first row, l2 in the second and l1 in the third. Thethresholds e used can be read above the plots.
Figure 6: Evolution of robust accuracy across iterations on Restricted ImageNet. We comparethe robust accuracy of PGD-1 (magenta) and FAB-1 (black) as a function of the employedforward/backward passes in the algorithm (one iteration of PGD corresponds to 2 passes,one iteration of FAB corresponds to 3 passes). Models: plain in the first column, l∞-at inthe second and l2-at in the third. Threat models: l∞ in the first row, l2 in the second and l1in the third. The thresholds e used can be read above the plots.
