Figure 1:	Generalizing PBL across a range of sparsity in training data and correctness in thephysical model.
Figure 2:	An overview of proposed NAS-based blending approach. Our PhysicsNAS takes ad-vantage of all the existing methods on blending physical prior, and is capable of generating newhybrid architectures for tasks under diversified physical environments. With the augmented searchspace and knowledge from prior information, it is possible for the proposed PhysicsNAS to gener-alize its performance with limited number of training samples.
Figure 3: Search space of our PhysicsNAS. In the proposed PhysicsNAS, all the nodes are denselyconnected by mixed operators from predefined candidate operation sets. The hidden nodes canobtain information from the original inputs or from previous hidden nodes within this search setup.
Figure 4: We evaluate our method on a simulator of classical tasks. The first task (Left) ispredicting the trajectory of a ball being tossed, and the second task (Right) is estimating the velocitiesof two objects after collision.
Figure 5: PhysicsNAS has lower errors compared with the best PBL methods over a rangeof quality conditions in physics and data. The left figure shows comparison between best PBLmethods and PhyisicsNAS along different physical mismatch levels. The physical mismatch levelsare from extreme to low, respectively. Here (r : ±i, k : j) refers to the mismatch level of a initialacceleration range [-im/s2, im/s2] and a damping factor j. Analogously, the right figure showscomparison along different data amounts. Results in the left figure are all trained with 32 samplesand the results in the right figure are trained at low physical mismatch level.The plots show error;lower curves are preferred.
Figure 6: Utilization of physical operations in PhysicsNAS. The selection of physics-inspiredoperation depends on its accuracy. PhysicsNAS tends to utilize the physical operations when theyare more accurate (like the elastic collision model), and prefers a residual connection when they areinaccurate (like the parabola equation).
Figure 7: Failure case. In rare situations, a single-stream network could be preferred. PhysicsNASis unable to converge to single-stream architectures due to the edge selection mechanism.
Figure 8: Even from limited training samples, PBL has strong generalizability as comparedwith conventional data-driven approaches. As exhibited in the left, estimation from physics cannot match the ground-truth trajectory due to the physical disparity. As a data hungry method, deepneural networks also fail to generate physically plausible estimation with limited training samples(the middle). As depicted in the right of the figure, PBL method solves the dilemma by utilizingknowledge from both data and physical prior. The predicted trajectory (marked as green dots) fromPBL highly overlaps with the ground truth in the testing stage.
Figure 9: Searched architectures of tossing task under diversified physical conditions.
Figure 10: Searched architectures of collision task under diversified physical conditions.
Figure 11: Initialized architectures of different NAS policies. The initialized architecture of NASwithout edge weights is generally shallow, since the number of the candidate operations between theinput nodes and the hidden nodes is less than the number of candidate operations between hiddennodes themselves.
Figure 12: Searched architectures using edge weights alleviates model collapse. The searched ar-chitecture without edge weights remains shallow due to the initial preference caused by unbalancedamount of operations, and its corresponding testing error is inferior to PhysicsNAS. The proposedPhysicsNAS has the potential to generate both deep and shallow architectures, while NAS with-out edge weights would generally converge to shallow architectures. The searched architecture ofPhysicsNAS is thus superior to the one without edge weights in terms of the testing error.
Figure 13: PhysicsNAS has lower errors compared with NAS framework without physics-based adaptations over a range of quality conditions in physics and data.
Figure 14: Data Efficiency of PhysicsNAS. With a rough physical prior, the demand of high-fidelitytraining samples can be greatly reduced. PhysicsNAS only requires less than 64 training samples toreach the testing performance of a Naive MLP with 256 training samples. It is reasonable to deployPhysicsNAS to alleviate the burden of data acquisition when there are limited training samples.
Figure 15: Changes of searched topology in tossing task. Inaccurate physical operation is used atearly epochs, however, it is discarded as the training proceeds.
Figure 16: Changes of searched topology in collision task. The physical operation is not adoptedinitially, yet the searched topology eventually adopts the physical operation.
Figure 17: Model collapse of PhysicsNAS due to the uncertainty of training. The performanceof PhysicsNAS depends on the differentiable searching process. Model collapse may appear ifhyperparameters are not selected carefully.
