Figure 1: Inference and reconstruction on test images. For each image, from left to right: in-put, reconstruction, summary of inferred locations, sprites generated from each appearance latentvariable.
Figure 3: Disentanglement experiments on test images. Objects are represented independently ofeach other, and their location and appearance are disentangled by design. Left: Latent traversalon one of the 7 location variables. Top right: Reordering the sequence {zl(oi)c }i or equivalently of{z(aip)p}i leads to objects being swapped (top row: original reconstruction; bottom row: swappedobjects). Bottom right: In each row, latent traversal on one of the appearance variables along onedimension.
Figure 5: Example of inference and reconstruction on multi-dSprites test images. From left toright: input, reconstruction, summary of inferred locations, sprites generated from the inferred ap-pearance latent variables.
Figure 6: Object swap. Changing the order of location (or equivalently appearance) latent variablesleads to objects being swapped. Top row: original reconstruction of test image; bottom row: objectsare swapped by manipulating the latent variables.
Figure 7: Left: Location traversal. Latent traversal on location variables in a test image with 3(i)objects. Right: Appearance traversal. Latent traversal on appearance variables: changing zappfor some i along one latent dimension corresponds to changing appearance attributes of one specificobject. The appearance latent space is only partially disentangled. Here we show examples wherea change in one latent dimension leads to a change of a single factor of variation (rows 2, 4, 5, 6).
Figure 8: Disentanglement with more objects. Latent traversal on location (top) and appearance(bottom) variables, on multi-MNIST-10k test images containing 7 objects. LAVAE can still correctlyinfer the scene’s structure and reconstruct it, allowing intervention on location or appearance ofsingle objects.
Figure 9: Generation with fixed number of objects. Images generated by LAVAE from a modifiedprior in which n takes value 5 or 6 with probability 1/2.
Figure 10: Prior samples. Left: images generated by sampling from LAVAE’s priorp(zloc | n)p(zapp | n)p(n), where p(n) is learned from data. Right: images generated by samplingfrom the baseline’s prior p(z).
Figure 11: Disentanglement experiments on test images with more objects than in the trainingregime. Objects are represented independently of each other, and their location and appearance aredisentangled by design. Top left: Reordering the sequence {zl(oi)c}i or equivalently of {z(aip)p}i leadsto objects being swapped (top row: original reconstruction; bottom row: swapped objects). Topright: Latent traversal on one of the 7 location variables. Bottom: Latent traversal on one of the 7appearance variables (along 3 different dimensions).
