Figure 1: Framework of the encoder assisted search process in the inference stage. The encoderand decoder are pretrained. The search process is implemented in the latent space formed by theencoder and starts at the point given by the encoder. The discrepancy between the input and thereconstruction can act as the feedback from the visual space to guide the search.
Figure 2: Architecture of AE-GANfθ(T(xadv)) = fθ(T(x)). The basic idea of our method is to purify input images by searching theclosest reconstruction without perturbations within little computation cost. To achieve this, we builda reconstruction network based on the encoder-decoder framework, which is denoted as AE-GAN+rand will be described in detail in Section 3.3. After training, the encoder of AE-GAN+r can provide agood representation for most inputs, and the decoder can always generate an image on the manifoldof natural samples during the search.
Figure 3: Detections on MNIST. Left: ROC curves when using AE-GAN+r to detect FGSM attackswith various . Middle: The False Negetive Rate and False Positive Rate when using different thresh-olds to detect FGSM attacks with various . Right: Detection performance on different strength ofFGSM attacks on MNIST dataset and the purification performance of AE-GAN+r.
Figure 4: Generated samples by BiGAN trained on MNIST (left) and F-MNIST (right).
Figure 5: Purified images on (a) MNIST and (b) F-MNIST dataset, under FGSM ( = 0.3) gray-boxattack, as well as (c) Half-Masked attack on F-MNIST. First row: the corrupted images; Secondrow: purified image by AE+s; Third row: purified image by AE-GAN+s; Last row: ground truth.
Figure 6: Detections on MNIST when using L1 distance as the indicator. Left: ROC curves whenusing AE-GAN+r to detect FGSM attacks with various . Right: The False Negetive Rate and FalsePositive Rate when using different thresholds to detect FGSM attacks with various .
Figure 7: Detections on F-MNIST when using L1 distance as the indicator. Left: ROC curves whenusing AE-GAN+r to detect FGSM attacks with various . Right: The False Negative Rate and FalsePositive Rate when using different thresholds to detect FGSM attacks with various .
Figure 8: Detections on F-MNIST when using MSE as the indicator. Left: ROC curves whenusing AE-GAN+r to detect FGSM attacks with various . Right: The False Negative Rate and FalsePositive Rate when using different thresholds to detect FGSM attacks with various .
Figure 9: Example results of our method on MNIST. The left part shows adversarial examplesgenerated by different attacks: FGSM attack with = 0.3 (a), PGD attack with = 3 (b) andCW with l2 norm (c), while the right part shows purified images by AE-GAN+rs. The number ofiterations for guided search is set to 15.
Figure 10: Example results of our method on F-MNIST. The left part shows adversarial examplesgenerated by different attacks: FGSM attack with = 0.3 (a), PGD attack with = 3 (b) andCW with l2 norm (c), while the right part shows purified images by AE-GAN+rs. The number ofiterations for guided search is set to 15.
