Figure 1: Concept: (a) Existing asymmetric multi-task learning model utilize task loss to perform staticknowledge transfer from one task to another; thus it cannot capture dynamically changing relationships betweentime-steps and tasks in the time-series domain. (b) Our model tackles the lack of loss by performing knowledgetransfer based on the feature-level uncertainty. This allows dynamic asymmetric knowledge transfer amongtasks and across timesteps.
Figure 2: Architecture overview. The amount and form of (d) knowledge transfer is computed by networksF and G, which will be described in detail on subsections 3.2 and 3.3.
Figure 3: Temporal probabilistic asymmetric knowledge transfer. 3a illustrates the uncertainty-awareknowledge transfer between two latent features. In this case, f is more reliable than g, so the model will learnto transfer more from f to g and transfer less from g to f . 3b shows how we apply it for knowledge transferbetween two tasks at the same timestep and at different timesteps.
Figure 4: Examples showing the relationship between the amount of knowledge transfer and the uncertaintyof source and target features. (a) The sources with low uncertainty transfer more knowledge. (b) The targetswith high uncertainty receive more knowledge.
Figure 5: Visualizations of the amount of uncertainty and normalized knowledge transfer for examplecases where the changes in the amount of uncertainty at certain timesteps are correlated with clinical events.
Figure 6: Task overview. Tasks used in the experiment included the diagnostic process of patient’s infectiousstatus (see Figure 6). When a patient in ICU is infected to any of the pathogen, body temperature elevates(Fever (Task 1)) as a sign of infection. Next, when physician prescribe diagnostic test such as blood culture,Infection (Task 2) is confirmed when the culture result turns out to be positive with bacteria, fungus, or virus.
Figure 7: Visualizations of the amount of uncertainty and knowledge transfer for example cases Thechanges in the amount of uncertainty at certain timesteps are correlated with clinical events. We denote thetimesteps with noticeable changes in uncertainty and knowledge transfer with blue boxes.
Figure 8: Uncertainty and Knowledge Transfer(KT) : Example case of MIMIC III - Heart Failuredataset where the changes in the amount of uncertainty at certain timesteps are correlated with clinical events.
