Figure 1: Unfolded signal flow graph and corresponding neural networkthe evolution of the state vectorM k ) = [X 1(k)	…XN(k )]>in the linear average consensus protocol (1) is written asX(k+1) = (I - L(k))X(k), X(0) =X0,whereX0 = [X 1,0	…XN ,θ]>denotes the initial state vector.
Figure 2: Optimized weight of edges in the Karate network. (a)-(j): Proposed method. (k): Staticoptimal strategy. The width of the lines indicate the values of the weights (the thicker a line is, thelarger its weight is). The edges having weight less than 10-2 are indicated by dashed lines.
Figure 3:	Empirical mean of the con-sensus errors (Karate network)Figure 4:	State trajectories (Karate network)dynamically changing in a non-trivial manner. In Fig. 4, we show the sample trajectories of theaverage consensus protocol with the static optimal and proposed edge weights. We confirm that theproposed edge weights achieves a more precise average consensus at the final time k = 10 comparedwith the static optimal strategy.
Figure 4:	State trajectories (Karate network)dynamically changing in a non-trivial manner. In Fig. 4, we show the sample trajectories of theaverage consensus protocol with the static optimal and proposed edge weights. We confirm that theproposed edge weights achieves a more precise average consensus at the final time k = 10 comparedwith the static optimal strategy.
Figure 5: Optimized weight of edges in the lattice network. (a)-(j): Proposed method. (k): Staticoptimal strategy. The width of the lines indicate the values of the weights (the thicker a line is, thelarger its weight is). The edges having weight less than 10-2 are indicated by dashed lines.
Figure 6: Empirical mean of the con-sensus errors (lattice network)(a) ErdoS-Renyi network(b) Barabasi-Albert modelFigure 7: State trajectories (lattice network)(c) Watts-Strogatz modelFigure 8: Mean consensus errors for random network models.
Figure 7: State trajectories (lattice network)(c) Watts-Strogatz modelFigure 8: Mean consensus errors for random network models.
Figure 8: Mean consensus errors for random network models.
Figure 9: Distribution of the mean consen-sus errors for the ER, BA, and WS networkmodels. Solid lines and shaded areas repre-sent the averages and the standard deviations,respectively.
