Figure 1: An example of connected fontsThere are two major drawbacks of the previous work. First, many of the ones that focus on fontsuse just one or two fonts. Others such as Jayasundara et al’s use some numbers of real examplesper class (in this case 200). There are much larger repositories of fonts available online, however,well beyond what Varga or Prabhu use. Many of these fonts are labelled as handwriting fonts, whichsuggests that they were created to mimic human handwriting.
Figure 2: A simple example of greedy splinification. Beam search further narrows the band, espe-cially on the left side.
Figure 3: An illustrated example of stroke expansion. T1 and T2 are the tangent points selectedrandomly from the midpoint to target point. P10 is the intersection point of the new arcs constructed atthe intersection of the tangent lines. M is the midpoint, where the window N - Range is constructedfrom-N is chosen randomly from this range. The dark blue line C20 is the new curve, while the lightblue line in the background is the hypothetical line constructed from the midpoint. Notice this linealways widens the stroke (it can easily be shown this curve never intersects the original curve exceptat the end points and tangent point), while the randomly chosen lines will be narrower at some point.
Figure 4: An example of velocity profiles of the two strokes from the previous example, and theiroverlap. In the upper half, the dashed and circled lines represent the agonist and antagonist strokesrespectively, while the black line is the resulting velocity profile. The overlap is calculated simplyby adding the two black lines, this is illustrated in the purple dashed line in between the two lines. Inthe lower half, the result of this overlap is shown in the dashed red arrow-it contracts the previouslyexpanded stroke.
Figure 5:	An example of generated zeros. The left is the base font, while the right is ten generatedzeros.
Figure 6:	An example of generated ones, the most common case of straight lines-the whole processof adding realistic noise did essentially nothing, and all eight examples look the same.
Figure 7:	An example of failures involving the generation process. All of these pairs were generatedby the same font, and the second example is the failure case. The second six failed to close the loopto the point where it looks like a five, while the second ”added” in the second and third exampleshas a loop that was flipped in directions, making the character look completely ridiculous. The fullloop is cut off in the first example.
