Figure 1: Left: Overview of the proposed SemanticAdv. Right: Illustration of our SemanticAdv in thereal world face verification platform. Note that the confidence denotes the likelihood that two facesbelong to the same person.
Figure 2: Qualitative comparisons between our proposed SemanticAdv and pixel-wise adversarialexamples generated by CW (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Along with the adversarial examples, wealso provide the corresponding perturbations (residual) on the right. Perturbations generated by ourSemanticAdv (G-FPR = 10-3) are unrestricted with semantically meaningful patterns. More resultsare shown in Appendix (see Figure N).
Figure 3:	Quantitative analysis on the attack success rate with different single-attribute attacks. Ineach figure, we show the results correspond to a larger FPR (G-FPR = T-FPR = 10-3) in skyblueand the results correspond to a smaller FPR (G-FPR = T-FPR = 10-4) in blue, respectively.
Figure 4:	Qualitative analysis on single-attribute adversarial attack (G-FPR = 10-3). More results areshown in Appendix (see Figure K, Figure L and Figure M).
Figure 5: Quantitative analysis on attacking several defense methods including JPEG (Dziugaiteet al., 2016), Blurring (Li & Li, 2017), and Feature Squeezing (Xu et al., 2017).
Figure 6: Qualitative results on attacking face landmark detection model.
Figure 7: Qualitative results on attacking street-view semantic segmentation model.
Figure H: Qualitative comparisons among ground truth, pixel-wise adversarial examples generatedby CW, and our proposed SemanticAdv. Here, we present the results from G-FPR < 10-4 so thatperturbations are visible.
Figure I:	Qualitative comparisons between attribute-space and feature-space interpolation.
Figure J:	Illustration of our SemanticAdv in the real world face verification platform (editing on paleskin). Note that the confidence denotes the likelihood that two faces belong to the same person.
Figure K:	Qualitative analysis on single-attribute adversarial attack (G-FPR = 10-3).
Figure L:	Qualitative analysis on single-attribute adversarial attack (G-FPR = 10-3).
Figure M:	Qualitative analysis on single-attribute adversarial attack (G-FPR = 10-3).
Figure N: Qualitative comparisons between our proposed SemanticAdv (G-FPR = 10-3) and pixel-wise adversarial examples generated by CW. Along with the adversarial examples, we also providethe corresponding perturbations (residual) on the right.
Figure O: Qualitative analysis on single-attribute adversarial attack (SemanticAdv with G-FPR =10-3) by each other. Along with the adversarial examples, we also provide the correspondingperturbations (residual) on the right.
