Figure 1: a.) The action selection networks select actions that maximize curiosity. b.) Parameterizedmacro-actions are converted to motion primitives c.) The forward dynamics module predicts theeffects of executing those motor primitives in a particular state. d.) The curiosity module representsthe current world state and outputs one of the curiosity metrics (see section 4.3). e.) The search treeis expanded.
Figure 2: Visualizations each of the four task categories used to test CSP. Top Row: representativeinitial state for each task. Bottom Row: representative final state for each task. The Block-Stacktask requires the robot to find a way to cause one block to remain stably at a high z-position withouttouching the arm, necessitating the building of a tower. The Push-Away task requires the robot topush the small (blue) block beyond the reach of the robot arm, which, depending on the circumstancemight require the robot to build a ramp. The Bookshelf tasks requires the robot to knock a book of ashelf which is further away from the robot that it can reach, necessitating that the robot discover howto build a simple tool from the provided blue rods. The Launch-Block task requires the robot tolaunch the small red block off the far end of the seesaw, but it can only do so (we think) by putting allfive of the other blocks as counterweight into the red bucket and detaching the pulley rope, causingthe now-heavy bucket to crash into the close end of the seesaw. Tasks are described in more detailin Section 4.1.
Figure 3: Solution speed for all tested algorithm variants across the five tested tasks. Within eachgroup of 7 bars, the left-most bars represent baselines, while the right-most are the CSP models,including the control No-Curosity control and several CSP variants with different curiosity metrics(see text for details). The y-axis is on a log scale because the differences between CSP and non-CSP solutions is so great that more subtle differences between various curiosity-metric variants ofCSP would otherwise be too small to see. Each bar is computed as the mean of six independenttrial runs, and error bars represent the standard error of the mean across trials. We set a maximumnumber of samples (107) in order to ensure termination; in many case the baseline algorithms failedto terminate with a successful solution on any trial.
Figure 4: (a) Inter-task and between-task transfer efficiency measured by the number of samplesneeded to reach the goal, for each of several transfer policies (only curiosity module, only actionselection module, and full network transfer). The C S P-RND variant is used for all cases. Withineach group of bars for a given task, the difference between blue bar (No Transfer) and other barsrepresents transfer gain (note that the y-axis is on a logarithmic scale). Each condition was run 6times and error bars represent standard error of the mean over runs. (b) Example of search trees foran instance of the 5-stack problem, before (left) and after (right) full network transfer.
