Figure 1: Sketch of the considered end-to-end architecture: we depict the considered NI -blockarchitecture which implements a NI -step interpolation algorithm described in Section 3.2. Operatorψ is defined through energy representation (7) and G refers to the NN-based approximation of thegradient-based update for minimization (1). This architecture uses as input a mask Ω correspondingto the missing-data-free domain and an initial gap-filling X(0) for state X. We typically initially fillmissing data with zeros for centered and normalized states.
Figure 2: Example of missing data interpolation for Lorenz-63 dynamics: from left to right, thetime series of each of the three components of Lorenz-63 states for dt = 0.02 and a 75% miss-ing data rate. We depict the irregularly-sampled observed data (black dots), the true state (green,-),the interpolated states using DINEOF (blue, -) and the interpolated states using the proposed ap-proach (G-NN-FP-OI) (red, -). Visually, the interpolated sequence using our approach can hardly bedistinguished from the true states.
Figure 3: Illustration of the considered MNIST dataset with the selected missing data patterns:we randomly remove data from N squared areas of size W .
Figure 4: Illustration of reconstruction results for FP-ConvAE model for MNIST examples: foreach panel, the first column refers to Zero-ConvAE1 results and the second one to Fp(15)-ConvAE1.
Figure 5: Interpolation examples for SST data used during training: first row, reference SST im-ages corresponding to the center of the considered 11-day time window; second row, associated SSTobservations with missing data, third row, interpolation issued from FP(15)-GE-NN2 model; thirdrow, reconstruction of the gap-free image series issued from FP(15)-GE-NN2 model; interpolationissued from an optimal interpolation scheme using a Gaussian covariance model with empiricallytuned parameters.
Figure 6: Interpolation examples for SST data never seen during training: first row, referenceSST images corresponding to the center of the considered 11-day time window; second row, as-sociated SST observations with missing data, third row, interpolation issued from FP(15)-GE-NN2model; third row, reconstruction of the gap-free image series issued from FP(15)-GE-NN2 model;interpolation issued from an optimal interpolation scheme using a Gaussian covariance model withempirically tuned parameters.
