Figure 1: Figure shows how the decision boundaries would change and become more boundedwhen a typical classifier is trained with an auxiliary (“reject”) class containing OOD samples. (a)The unbounded decision boundaries of a typical 4-class classifier. Digit 9 is incorrectly classifiedas digit 2 with very high confidence. (b) A 5-class classifier trained with OOD samples ‘x’ that areclose to in-distribution and form the fifth (“reject”) class, resulting in bounded decision boundaries.
Figure 2: fk’s and Qr’s for an example 3-class ReLU classifier where the input x ∈ R. Q1∞ and Q4∞are infinity polytopes. (a) For sufficiently large (small) x, there is a unique k = 1 in Q∞ (k* = 1in Q∞). (b) For sufficiently large x, there are multiple k*,s in Q∞ (k* = {2,3}). For sufficientlysmall x, there is a unique k = 3 in Q∞.
Figure 3: Categories of OOD samples that we generate: (a) Type I (yellow), which includes samplesthat are close to the data but outside the in-distribution sub-manifolds, and (b) Type II (black), whichincludes samples that lie on the in-distribution sub-manifolds and trace the in-distribution boundary;in-distribution clusters are represented through blue and red points.
Figure 4: Generated OOD samples using the proposed method; Type I OOD samples typicallymodify the background pixels (normal components have the least variance), while Type II OODsamples modify the object pixels.
Figure 5: Plots for boundary OOD samples experiments. (a) Training data in 2D. (b) Maximumprediction output on test data for a confident-classifier. (c) Classification output of a classifier witha “reject” class on test data (TC = true class, PC = predicted class).
Figure 6: Plots for general OOD samples experiments. (a) Training data in 2D. (b) Maximumprediction output on test data for a confident-classifier. (c) Classification output of a classifier witha “reject” class on test data.
Figure 7: Generated OOD samples using a joint training of a GAN and a confident-classifier. Weobserve that the generated OOD samples don’t cover the entire in-distribution boundary.
Figure 8: Generated boundary OOD samples using our approach. (a) 3d plot of in-distribution datawith out-of-manifold boundary OOD samples. (b) 3d plot of in-distribution data with on-manifoldboundary OOD samples. (c) 2d projection of in-distribution data with on-manifold boundary sam-ples to show that they cover the in-distribution boundary on the manifold.
