Figure 1: Overview of our experiments. We construct eigenSDF representations and evaluate themon multiple downstream tasks. As an additional approach we also consider finetuning the decoderusing the eigenvectors from PCA as initializations and the chamfer lossIn Michalkiewicz et al. (2019) a CNN decoder model is used to predict the SDF representationfrom a latent space as well as to learn autoencoders. We note however that this representation iswell structured and objects are often grouped by category, we thus ask if a much simpler linear andnon-convolutional decoder model can be effective.
Figure 2: Training time of eigenSDF (finetuned) and dense convnets (Voxels, DLS). Figure showson a logscale amount of seconds a network needs for forward and backward pass of 1 iteration usinga batchsize of 32. Resolution 256 not shown due to clarity.
Figure 3: We compare unconditional generations of cars category. Generations from a gaussian fittoeigenSDF is shown in the top row (blue). Second row are generations from Mescheder et al. (2018)and the third row is from a 3D GAN Wu et al. (2016b)5 ConclusionWe have shown that using a simple linear decoder coupled with the SDF representation yields com-petitive results. The SDF lends itself to the application of PCA yielding a strong but simple baselinefor future work in learned 3D shape analysis. Moreover, our work suggests that more complexbaseline datasets may be needed to further evaluate deep learning methods on 3D shape inference.
Figure 4: Cumulative fraction of total variance captured by eigenvectorsobtained from applying PCA on ShapeNetCars dataset.
Figure 5: Cumulative fraction of total variance captured by eigenvectorsobtained from applying PCA on large ShapeNet categories.
Figure 6: Cumulative fraction of total variance captured by eigenvectorsobtained from applying PCA on small ShapeNet categories.
Figure 7: SDF-based pca reconstruction ofan example from ShapeNetCarsdataset. Left - Level set of a SDF of a car with resolution 1283, right - pca-based recostruction using 2048 eigenvectors.
Figure 8: Failed attempt of reconstructing an example from ShaPeNetCarsdataset using voxel-based representation. Left - voxelized car with resolu-tion 1283, right - pca-based recostruction using 2048 eigenvectorsthe results of pca reconstruction using Signed Distance Function as shape representation, applyingPCA directly on voxels yeilds poor results, as shown in Figures 7-8.
