Figure 2: The OOD detection performance of our input preprocessing (IPP) strategy, which selectsthe perturbation magnitude with only in-distribution data. The setting plain means the IPP is turnedoff. The in-distribution data is CIFAR-100. The backbone network is Resnet-34. Each value isaveraged with the results on 8 OOD datasets listed in Table 1. Each method has its own scoringfunction S(x) (See Section 2.1 and 3), causing IPP to perform at varied levels of performance gain.
Figure 1: An ablation study with three variants in our DeCOnf method (Section 3.1). Plain meansg(x) = 1 so that the confidence decomposing effect is turned off. Each bar in (a) is averagedwith the results on 8 OOD datasets listed in Table 1. The backbone network is Resnet-34. Notethat the plain setting with inner-product is equivalent to a vanilla Resnet for classification. Overall,our DeConf boosts the OOD detection performance while losing a small fraction of classificationaccuracy on in-distribution data.
Figure 3: Robustness analysis of 6 OOD detection methods. The left figure has classifiers trainedon varied number of samples in CIFAR-10. The right figure has classifiers trained on varied numberof classes in CIFAR-100. Each point in the line is an average of the results on 8 OOD datasets. Thebackbone network is Resnet-34. Please see Section 4.2 for a detailed discussion.
Figure 4: Robustness analysis using different neural network backbones. The in-distribution data isCIFAR-100. EaCh bar is averaged with the results on 8 OOD datasets.
Figure 5: Semantic shift versus Non-Semantic shift. We setup the two types of distribution shiftsusing DomainNet (Peng et al., 2018)B Additional ResultsTable 4: OOD detection performance with DomainNet. In this table we use whole real set (345classes) for the in-distribution data. The remaining five domains are OOD data. The backbonenetworks is Resnet-34 trained from scratch. Each value is averaged with 3 runs. The values inparentheses are standard deviation. The type of distribution shift in this experiment is categorizedas non-semantic shift.
