Figure 2: Illustration of domain-shift object detec-tion in autonomous driving scenario. Images arefrom INIT dataset (Shen et al., 2019).
Figure 3: Overview of our SCL framework. More details please refer to Section 2.
Figure 4: Parameter sensitivity for the value of λ(left) and Y (right) in adaptation from Cityscapes toFoggyCityscapes and from Sim10k to Cityscapes.
Figure 5: AP (%) with different IoU thresholds. We show comparisons on three datasets and allresults are calculated with different IoU thresholds and illustrated in different colors.
Figure 6: Visualization of Attention Maps on source and target domains. We use feature mapsafter Conv B3 in Figure 3 for visualizing. Top: Input images; Middle: Heatmaps from modelsw/o gradient detach; Bottom: Heatmaps from models w/ gradient detach. The colors (red→blue)indicate values from high to low. It can be observed that w/ detach training, our models can learnmore discriminative representation between object areas and background (context).
Figure 7: Detection examples with DA (Chen et al., 2018), Strong-Weak (Saito et al., 2019) andour proposed SCL on three datasets. For each group, the first row is the result of DA, the secondrow is from Strong-Weak and the last row is ours. We show detections with the scores higher than athreshold (0.3 for FoggyCityscapes and 0.5 for other two).
Figure 8: More visualizations of Attention Maps on source and target domains. Top: Input images;Middle: Heatmaps from models w/o gradient detach; Bottom: Heatmaps from models w/ gradientdetach. The colors (red→blue) indicate values from high to low.
Figure 9:	Visualization of feature embedding on three adaptation datasets by t-SNE (Maaten &Hinton, 2008). Red indicates the source examples and blue indicates the target one. In each group,the first row is the result of w/o detach model, the second row is from with detach model. In eachrow, from left to right are results from features after B1, B2, B3 and the 384-dim context features.
Figure 10:	More detection examples with our proposed SCL on Clipart and Watercolor. We showdetections with the scores higher than 0.5.
