Figure 1: DBNN Inference. OCHs are added to the DNN to estimate the probabilities of input andoutput vector streams. Given a new data, OCHZ adjusts the weight (arrows) of the nearest codevectorof OCHZ representing the input vector stream. DBNN adjusts weights of the codevectors of theOCHY representing the predictive distribution based on the results of the inner DNN. DBNN derivespredictive result and uncertainty from the weighted ensemble of the codevectors of OCHY .
Figure 2: Simple linear regression on synthetic dataset. In figs. 2a to 2d, the top is the approximatedinput probability p(x, w0) and the bottom is the approximated output probability with data p(x, y) att = 0 with v = 0.3. In these figures, fig. 2a and fig. 2b are samples from the distribution, and fig. 2cand fig. 2d are distributions approximated by OCHZ and OCHY . The sizes of the circles representsthe importance weights of each codevector. Figures 2e to 2f are the expected values and standarddeviations of y depending on the timestamp for different v. The black dotted lines represent truevalues. The error is 90% confidence interval.
Figure 3: Prediction execution time ofMU and DBNN for the number of hidden layers. The executiontimes increase linearly as the layer increases. If the number of hidden layers is 0, DBNN is slowerthan MU, but as the number of hidden layers increases, DBNN is faster than MU. The increase ratesof execution times of MU and DBNN are 8.6ms/layer and 3.5ms/layer, respectively.
Figure 4: NLLs of DBNN for hyperparameters K, λ, and σ(φ), and the NLL for throughput (fromleft). In all figures, the NLLs of DNN and BNN are represented as blue and green dashdot horizontallines, respectively. In the fourth figure, the throughput of DNN is represented as blue vertical dashdotline. The error is 80% confidence interval.
Figure 5: Confidence histograms and reliability diagrams of U-Net on the CamVid dataset. The topis the confidence histogram and the bottom is the the reliability histogram. The black dotted linesin the reliability diagram show the accuracy we expect for each confidence. There is a large gapbetween confidence and accuracy in the reliability diagram of the DNN, which means that it is poorlycalibrated. On the other hand, MU is relatively well-calibrated.
Figure 6: Qualitative results on the CamVid dataset for each method. In figs. 6c to 6f, the firstrow is the predictive result and the second row is the predictive confidence. A whiter backgroundcorresponds to higher confidence.
