Figure 1: Black Box Recursive Translation (BBRT).
Figure 2: Left and Center: Top 100 logP generated compounds under BBRT-Seq2Seq, BBRT-JTNN,and their non-recursive counterparts. Right: Diversity of top 100 generated compounds under bothBBRT models and the top 100 compounds from the training data.
Figure 3: Top scoring compounds for properties logP and QED under BBRT-Seq2Seq and BBRT-JTNN.
Figure 4: Ablation experiments using BBRT-Seq2Seq. A. Left: Mean logP from 900 translationsas a function of recursive iteration for three decoding strategies. Dotted lines denote non-recursivecounterparts. Right: Mean logP as a function of recursive iteration for 4 scoring functions. B. Left:Diversity of generated outputs across recursive iterations for logP translation. Right: Diversity ofgenerated outputs across recursive iterations for QED translation.
Figure 5: A. Generated molecular trace by ranking intermediate outputs by the maximum pairwiseTanimoto similarity. B. An example molecular breakpoint. Alternative translations are consideredfrom compound (2) each with its own design trade-offs.
Figure 6: Applying BBRT to multi-property optimization. QED is the primary target and logP is thesecondary property. A: Average logP as a function of recursive iteration for three decoding strategieswith primary and secondary property scoring functions. B: Average QED as a function of recursiveiteration for three decoding strategies with primary and secondary property scoring functions.
Figure 7: Comparison of scoring functions for BBRT-JTNN. Y-axis is mean logP from 900 transla-tions as a function of recursive iteration. Dotted lines denote non-recursive counterparts. ‘Rec. Inf.’is synonymous with BBRT-JTNN.
Figure 8: Applying BBRT-JTNN to secondary property optimization. QED is the primary targetand logP is the secondary property. Left: Average logP as a function of recursive iteration undertwo scoring functions—QED and logP. Right: Average QED as a function of recursive iteration forsame two scoring functions.
Figure 9: A. Applying BBRT-Seq2Seq to three seed sequence sets with 100 samples each. TheMaxMin algorithm was used to select samples with varying levels of diversity (max: 0.94, avg:0.86, and min: 0.78). For each input sequence, we sampled 100 times from a top5 sampler andranked samples using logP. Standard error is reported by averaging over 10 BBRT-Seq2Seq runswith different seed sets. B. Applying BBRT-Seq2Seq to three seed sequence sets with 100 sampleseach and varying logP values (low: logP values < 1, medium: values between -1 and 1, high: values> 1). Standard error is reported by averaging over 10 runs each with a randomly chosen set of seedsequences.
Figure 10: A molecular trace from optimizing logP using a logP scoring function.
Figure 11: Comparing pairwise Levenshtein edit distances for generated sequences after runningBBRT under two different scoring functions (logP and maximum pairwise Tanimoto similarity) andtwo different decoding strategies (top 2 and top 5 sampling). Standard errors are reported from apopulation of 900 sequences per iteration.
