Figure 1: We plot the channel distortion against test accuracy (%). The distortion of the imprecisechannels has to be large enough to recover the correct label but not so large that it degrades modelperformance. The base test accuracy is about 93.5% for CIFAR-10 and 83.5% for ImageNet on 1000randomly chosen images (results for the full test CIFAR-10 set and the full dev ImageNet set can befound in the Appendix in Figure 7). The experiment is run for the C&W L2 attack with 100 iterationsand the PGD attack with 40 iterations.
Figure 3: The top eigenvalues of the Hessianswith respect to (w.r.t.) the input 1024 images fromthe CIFAR-10 dataset trained on the ResNet-18architecture. We plot the histogram that showscounts of magnitudes for the eigenvalues. Yaoet al. (2018) show analysis of the Hessian w.r.t.
Figure 2: Non-adaptive attack and the recov-erable ranges in terms of the c parameter thatcontrols the strength of the C&W L2 attack. Wesystematically change the c parameter and keepthe parameters for the channels unchanged. Weuse the VGG-16 network and all images from theCIFAR-10 test set. The test accuracy of the modelwithout any noise layers and on the clean data is85.23%.
Figure 4: Comparison of magnitude of gradients for original and adversarial images.
Figure 5: The test accuracy after passing clean images through six different noisy channels, wherethe added noise is controlled by the compression rate and epsilon parameters. We use full CIFAR-10test set for ResNet-18, and full ImageNet validation set for ResNet-50.
Figure 6: The test accuracy after four different attacks and the recovery via the uniform noisestochastic channel with different parameters . For the Carlini-Wagner L2 attack, the best performingparameter = 0.03. We run the experiment for ResNet-50 on ImageNet (1000 samples).
Figure 7: We plot the channel distortion against accuracy (%), analogously to Figure 1. Theexperiment is run for the PGD attack with 40 iterations and C&W L2 attack with 100 iterations on allimages from the test CIFAR-10 and the dev ImageNet datasets. The adversary is not aware of thedefense. The test accuracy on the full clean data is 93.56% and 76.13% for CIFAR-10 and ImageNet,respectively. Interestingly enough, we observe that the C&W attack is on the sub-pixel level forImageNet and rounding to the nearest 8 bit integers in the CD channel has high recovery rate, whilefor 7 bit integer the accuracy drops slightly due to imprecision.
Figure 8: Comparison of accuracy of the perturbation channels on clean and adversarial images.
Figure 9: Frequency of model predictions for original, adversarial, and other classes as we increasethe distance from an adversarial example using Gaussian noise.
Figure 10: Distribution of deltas for imprecise channels.
Figure 11: We plot a sample image from the ImageNet dataset in its original state, after adversarial(white-box, non-adaptive) attack, and then after recovery via imprecise channels: CD (color depthreduction with 32 bits), FC (30% compression in the frequency domain), Gaussian, and uniformnoise ( = 0.03). The order is from left to right, and from top to bottom.
Figure 12: The original image from the ImageNet dataset, its adversarial example, and the state ofthe image after recovery from the attack via the 30% compressed Fourier Channel (FC). The heatmaps of magnitudes of Fourier coefficients are presented in a logarithmic scale (dB) with linearinterpolation and the max value is colored with white while the min value is colored with black.
Figure 13:	For the CIFAR-10 dataset, we run mul-tiple trials of the uniform noise channel and takethe most frequent prediction. We further test multi-ple noise levels. The multiple trials improve over-all accuracy for different noise levels significantly.
Figure 14:	For the CIFAR-10 dataset, werun multiple trials of the uniform noisechannel and take the most frequent predic-tion in the defense (many noise iterations).
Figure 15: The changes in the L2 norm of the gradient of the loss w.r.t. the input image x for thecorrect class corg as we add Gaussian noise to the original image. The experiment is run on 1000images from the ImageNet dataset.
Figure 16:	The changes in the L2 norm of the gradient for the correct class corg and the adversarialclass cadv as we add Gaussian noise to the adversarial image generated with C&W L2 attack (welabel such an image as a gauss image x). The experiment is run on 1000 images from the CIFAR-10dataset.
Figure 17:	The changes in the L2 norm of the gradient of the loss for the correct class corg , theadversarial class cadv , and a random class cran as we add Gaussian noise to the adversarial imagegenerated with C&W L2 attack (we label such an image as a gauss image x). The experiment is runon 1000 images from the CIFAR-10 dataset.
Figure 18: The spectrum of the Hessian withrespect to the original and adversarial inputs. Weuse the symmetric log scale on the y axis and plotthe min and max ranges of the eigenvalues for100 images from the ImageNet dataset trained theResNet-50 architecture.
Figure 19: The top eigenvalues of the Hessianson ImageNet using ResNet-50.
Figure 20: Test accuracy as a function of the strenghts of the attacks for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10.
