Figure 1: Salient explanation. As the value of decreases, the heat map concentrates more and moreon the most discriminative part of the relevant objects, the bird’s face in this case. The salient expla-nation is very important for a variety of tasks such as the fine-grained classification and biomarkerdiscovery in medical image. Note that the salient explanation is possible due to our idea of adoptingGaussian mask.
Figure 2: Overview of the GLAS method.
Figure 3: Framework of RGLAS. The GLAS instances are repeated until all discriminative patternsrelated to a given class have been dis-covered.
Figure 4: Visual comparison with the existing models. From top to bottom: red-winged blackbird,Northern flicker, European goldfinch, and crested auklet. We introduce the uniform characteristicsof each bird: first row (red wings), second row (red below the eyes and black spots on the body),third row (red face and yellow on the wings), and fourth row (orange beak).
Figure 5: From left to right: originalimage, heat map, and image perturbedby the inverse heat map along with theclass probabilities. Green-tailed towheeand red-winged blackbird.
Figure 6: Visual comparisons of GLAS, RISE, and Deconvaccording to their parameters controlling the locality. Theexample is the Eu-ropean goldfinch characterized by redface and yellow spot on the wings. GLAS adjusts the stan-dard deviation. Deconv adjusts the occlusion mask size. TheRISE adjusts the size of the initial mask.
Figure 7: Unveiling the feature selection behaviors ofCNN. The top two rows illustrate two bird classes,Red-legged Kittiwake and Pi-geon guillemot. Despiteits name, the Red-legged Kittiwake were consistentlyhighlighted on faces while the Pigeon guil-lemot washighlighted on the red legsSuccess cases (Top 1 : Red Iegged kittiwake)Figure 8: Visual explanations on Aircraft andStanford Car benchmarks.
Figure 8: Visual explanations on Aircraft andStanford Car benchmarks.
Figure 9: Visual comparison of the class-discriminative capability of MASK, Grad-CAM,RISE, and GLAS by varying the object classes.
Figure 10: Recursive process. This algorithm dis-covers the relevant parts of a given class in orderof significance. We used the adaptive stop condi-tion mentioned in Section 3.
Figure 11: Visual explanation examples produced by GLAS for the image captioning model.
Figure 12: Visual distribution of discriminative biomarkers in the classification of AD. The first rowsillustrate a brain template image overlapped with important biomarkers (rank 1 of Table 1: red, rank2: green, rank 3: blue, rank 4: yellow, rank 5: purple). The second rows show AAL wise saliencymap.
Figure 13: Red winged blackbird. The uniform characteristic is red shoulder patch.
Figure 14: Red winged blackbird. The uniform characteristic is red shoulder patch.
Figure 15: Crested auklet. The uniform characteristic is orange beak.
Figure 16: Eared grebe. The uniform characteristic is red eyes.
Figure 17: Red headed woodpecker. The uniform characteristic is red head.
Figure 18: Red bellied woodpecker. The uniform characteristic is black and white barred patternson their back, wings and tail. Adult males have a red cap going from the bill to the nape; femaleshave a red patch on the nape and another above the bill.
Figure 20: Prairie warbler. The uniform characteristic is dark streaks on the flanks and head.
Figure 21: Myrtle warbler. The uniform characteristics are yellow crown, rump and flank patches.
Figure 22: European goldfinch. The uniform characteristics are red face and broad yellow bar onthe wings.
Figure 23: Gold Winged Warbler. The uniform characteristics are yellow crown and wing patch.
Figure 24: Rose breasted grosbeak. The uniform characteristic is bright red-red patch on the breast.
Figure 25: Red faced cormorant. The uniform characteristic is red patch around the eyes.
