Figure 1: Block diagram of primitive and transitional skills.
Figure 2: Diverse primitive skills (ω0, ω1, ω2, ω3) in MountainCar (a, b) and HalfCheetah (c). (a)shows the changes of the feature values of 4 diverse skills. (b) shows the corresponding statisticalcharacteristics of 4 skills in (a), where a single box-plot denotes a skill. (c) shows 3 diverse skills ofthe half-cheetah.
Figure 3: Transition in Mountain-Car (a,b) and HalfCheetah (c). (a) shows the transition of thetrajectory, where 9 transitional skills are uniformly distributed along the horizontal axis from Step 0to 5500. (b) shows the transition of feature statistics, where the features of two primitive skills and9 transitional skills are included. (c) shows the sampled frames of the transition trajectory, whereK-1=9.
Figure 4: Comparison of diversity of primitive skills between LTS and DIAYN.
Figure 5: Comparison of transitional skills.
Figure 6: Transitional skills with related to 2 dif-ferent number of them.
Figure 7: Skill sPaCe of DIAYN and LTS.
Figure 8: Visualization of transition trajectories of (a) DIAYN-random, (b) DIAYN-smooth and(c) LTS-smooth. Top row contains the states generated by different skills noted by the dots and thered lines represent the agent’s sampled trajectories, both of which are mapped to a two-dimensionalspace by t-SNE. Bottom contains the frames of transition trajectories.
Figure 9: The space of primitive skills and transitional skills, where we set N = 3, K - 1 = 3.
Figure 10: Cartpole primitive skills. (a) - (j) stand for 10 random trials with 4 primitive skills foreach, and different skills are distinguished by Boxplot. (k) shows the skills in time domain for onetrial.
Figure 11: Mountain Car primitive skills. (a) - (j) stand for 10 random trials with 4 primitive skillsfor each, and different skills are distinguished by Boxplot. (k) shows the skills in time domain forone trial.
Figure 12: Pendulum primitive skills. (a) - (j) stand for 10 random trials with 4 primitive skills foreach, and different skills are distinguished by Boxplot. (k) shows the skills in time domain for onetrial.
Figure 13: Mountain Car transition process. (a) (e), (b) (f), (c) (g), and (d) (g) are from different4 trials respectively. Each transitional skill holds 500 steps and then transfers the final state to thenext skill.
Figure 14: Pendulum transition process. (a) (e), (b) (f), (c) (g), and (d) (g) are from different 4trials respectively. Each transitional skill holds 500 steps and then transfers the final state to the nextskill.
Figure 15: Cartpole transition process. (a) (e), (b) (f), (c) (g), and (d) (g) are from different 4 trialsrespectively. Each transitional skill holds 500 steps and then transfers the final state to the next skill.
Figure 16: Transitional skills comparison on MountainCar. The subgraphs (a),(b),(c),(d) repre-sent the mean of features in terms of the transitional skills, and subgraphs (e),(f),(g),(h) representthe variance of features.
