Figure 1: Classic analysis pipeline forscRNA-seq data and Melanoma exampleUnder review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 2: BBSC Pipeline for scRNA-seq dataseek a rather universal treatment for a broad rangeof patients. To solve this dilemma, major modifica-tions are needed for the analysis pipeline of cancerscRNA-seq data.
Figure 2: BBSC Pipeline for scRNA-seq dataseek a rather universal treatment for a broad rangeof patients. To solve this dilemma, major modifica-tions are needed for the analysis pipeline of cancerscRNA-seq data.
Figure 3: Infer F from scRNA-seq data3Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020of ON expression state, i.e., gene ex-pression above the threshold is con-sidered as f > 0 while expression below the threshold is considered as with an OFF state, i.e.
Figure 4: Performance comparison of PFAST with ASSO,PANDA and MPtional cost and fitting accuracy. With the significant improvement of speed, PFAST still manages to5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Head and Neck CancerMelanomaA. ClassicCellTypeE. Classic CeIIType■ myocyte■ HN28 ■ HNlZ■ HN7 H HN22■ HN5 El HN6■ HN10■	CY/4	■	CY6/	■	CY6/	■	CY60 ・ MONIKA■	CY79	■	CY65	■	CY65	Ξ	CY80■	CY82	■	CY78	■	CY78	■	CY59■	CY53	■	CY84	■	CY84	■	CY60Figure 5: BBSC analysis of Head and neck and Melanoma scRNA-seq data■ tndotħelιal ■ Macrophage ■ HN2t
Figure 5: BBSC analysis of Head and neck and Melanoma scRNA-seq data■ tndotħelιal ■ Macrophage ■ HN2t■ T_cell■ Dendritic■ Mastmaintain information by decomposed patterns. Meanwhile, the PFAST has a pattern sparsity levelvery close to true density 0.2 and 0.4, also indicating the rationality of PFAST decomposition. Thus,PFAST is suitable in dealing with large scale data like scRNA-seq data.
Figure 6: Detailed analysis of cancer cell clusters■ Cluster 1口 Cluster 2□ Cluster 3□ Cluster 4■ Cluster 55	DiscussionEnabled by the development of single cell technology, we now can observe the complicated bio-logical process like cancer with unprecedented resolution. However, the classic analysis pipelinefails to deliver detailed information: 1) it does not reveal common characteristic of cancer cell indifferent cancer patients. 2) Even it separates functional cells; it fails to reveal intra-cluster hetero-geneity. To solve above problems, we have developed BBSC analysis pipeline. Rooted from castingthe frequency change in gene expression, we have applied BMF in the feature selection process,which avoids adding new expensive and potentially noisy information. We have applied tailoredbinarizing process for each dataset. Moreover, to deal with big scale tall matrix like scRNAseq data,we have developed a fast and efficient algorithm called PFAST. Letting alone its fast speed in han-dling large-scale data, it shows high accuracy compared with state-of-art BMF algorithms. We haveapplied BBSC on two high quality cancer studies, head and neck cancer and melanoma. In bothdatasets, BBSC shutters the big clusters into several sub clusters, and promotes a gateway to analy-sis intra-cluster heterogeneity. Moreover, BBSC manages to get common cancer sub cell clusters in
