Figure 1: Gen-RKM schematic representation modeling a common subspace H between two datasources X and Y. The φ1, φ2 are the feature maps (Fx and Fy represent the feature-spaces) corre-sponding to the two data sources. While ψ1, ψ2 represent the pre-image maps. The interconnectionmatrices U , V model dependencies between latent variables and the mapped data sources.
Figure 2:	Generated samples from the model using CNN as explicit feature map in the kernel func-tion. In (a), (b), (c), (d) the yellow boxes in the first column show training examples and the adjacentboxes show the reconstructed samples. The other images (columns 3-6) are generated by randomsampling from the fitted distribution over the learned latent variables. (e) and (f) shows the generatedimages through bilinear interpolations in the latent space.
Figure 3:	Multi-view generation on CelebA dataset showing images and attributes.
Figure 4: Multi-view Generation (images and labels) on various datasets using implicit and explicitfeature maps.
Figure 5: Exploring the learned uncorrelated-features by traversing along the eigenvectors. The firstcolumn shows the scatter plot of latent variables using the top two principal components. The greenlines within, show the traversal in the latent space and the related rows show the correspondingreconstructed images.
Figure 6: Relative importance matrix as computed by Lasso and Random Forest regaressors onDSprites dataset for hdim = {10, 2} against the underlying data generating factors zdim = {2}corresponding to x, y positions of object.
Figure 7: Relative importance matrix as computed by Lasso and Random Forest regaressors onTeapot dataset for hdim = {10, 5} against the underlying data generating factors zdim = {5}corresponding to azimuth, elevation and colors red, green and blue of the teapot object.
Figure 8: Comparing Gen-RKM and standard VAE for reconstruction and generation quality. In re-construction MNIST and reconstruction CelebA, uneven columns correspond to the original image,even columns to the reconstructed image.
