Figure 1: Mistaking a dragon for a bird (left) may be dangerous but missing it altogether because ofsnow (right) means playing with fire. Sadly, this is exactly the fate that an autonomous agent relyingon a state-of-the-art object detection system would suffer. Predictions generated using Faster R-CNN;best viewed on screen.
Figure 2: Expect the unexpected: To ensure safety, an autonomous vehicle must be able to recognizeobjects even in challenging outdoor conditions such as fog, rain, snow and at night.1This fictional example highlights the problems that arise when Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) encounter settings that were not explicitly part of their training regime. For example, state-of-the-art object detection algorithms such as Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) fail to recognizeobjects when snow is added to an image (as shown in Figure 1), even though the objects are stillclearly visible to a human eye. At the same time, augmenting the training data with several typesof distortions is not a sufficient solution to achieve general robustness against previously unknowncorruptions: It has recently been demonstrated that CNNs generalize poorly to novel distortion types,despite being trained on a variety of other distortions (Geirhos et al., 2018).
Figure 3: 15 corruption types from Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019), adapted to corrupt arbitraryimages (example: randomly selected PASCAL VOC image, center crop, severity 3). Best viewed onscreen.
Figure 4: Training data visualization for COCO and Stylized-COCO. The three different trainingsettings are: standard data (top row), stylized data (bottom row) and the concatenation of both (termed‘combined’ in plots).
Figure 5: Figure 5: Training on stylized data improves test performance of Faster R-CNN on corruptedversions of PASCAL VOC, MS COCO and Cityscapes which include all 15 types of corruptionsshown in Figure 3. Corruption severity 0 denotes clean data. Corruption specific performances areshown in the appendix (Figures 7, 8, 9).
Figure 6: Relative performance under corruption (rPC) as a function of corruption RMSE (left, highervalue=greater change in pixel space) and SSIM (right, higher value=higher perceived image quality)evaluated on PASCAL VOC. The dots indicate the rPC of Faster R-CNN trained on standard data;the arrows show the performance gained via training on ‘combined’ data. Corruptions are groupedinto four corruption types: noise, blur, weather and digital.
Figure 1: Home Box Office, Inc. (HBO).
Figure 7: Results for each corruption type on PASCAL-C.
Figure 8: Results for each corruption type on COCO-C.
Figure 9: Results for each corruption type on Cityscapes-C.
Figure 10: Results for each corruption type using different backbones. Faster R-CNN trained on MSCOCO with ResNet-50, ResNet-101 and ResNext-101_64x4d backbones.
