Figure 1: Recorded 16-channel wrist sEMG data with twitches in index finger in the first activesection, and twitches in pinkie in the second active section.
Figure 2: DSD-D factored sEMG data with 10 learned MUAP templates on the right, 10 corre-sponding spike trains on the upper left, and spike firing time overlaid on the sEMG on the lowerleft.
Figure 3: DSD-D factored sEMG data, zoomed-in sections of the spike trains and sEMG. On theleft shows the pinkie active section, and on the right shows the index finger active section.
Figure 4: 3 MUAPs with high noise dataset. DSD-T results of inferred MUAP templates and spiketrains (red) and ground-truth (black)Note: The shifted MU-1 template doesn’t affect the template score, but causes an offset in the correspondingspike train, which affects the overall_avg_prt scoreFor those experiments, the cardinality range of a dataset’s underlying MUAPs are known, and setsof hyperparameters for both KS-1 and DSD-X were tuned accordingly. This was done so as toassess: i) How easy and meaningful hyperparameter tunings is for both algorithm families, and ii)to assess how well their performance is even if cardinality ranges are known ahead of time. Table 1summarizes those results.
Figure 5: 3 MUAPs with high noise dataset. KiloSort results of inferred MUAP templates and spiketrains (red) and ground-truth (black)-≡≡≡≡≡≡-≡≡ = ≡-三三三三二工5 ConclusionWe present a novel self-supervised learning algorithm for spike sorting of multichannel sEMG data.
Figure 6: Simulated dataset with ground-truth MUAP templates and spike trainsMore specifically, there are 5 simulated datasets we use in the evaluation. The 3 MU dataset has3 MU templates with one channel offset which is the most simple and non-trivial case. The 3 MUwith high noise dataset has the same MUs as the 3 MU dataset except the noise power is increasedby 4 times, which is to test the performance on lower SNR datasets. The 5 MU dataset has 3MU templates on the same channel and 2 MU templates on another channel, which is to test thecapability of addressing the spatial superposition problem. The 7 MU dataset has 5 MU templateswith one channel offset, and 2 MU templates on the same channel. The 9 MU dataset has 5 MUtemplates with one channel offset and 4 MU templates on the same channel. The last two datasetsare the stress-test cases by increasing the amount of MUs and spatial superpostion. Figure 6 showsthe example of 3 MU simulated dataset on the right, the MUAP templates used on the upper left,and the spike trains used on the lower left.
