Figure 1: (Left & Center): Samples generated with an InfoGAN model learned with a fixed uni-form categorical distribution Cat(K = 10, p = 0.1) on balanced and imbalanced data, respec-tively. Each row corresponds to a different learned latent category. (Right): Samples generated withElastic-InfoGAN using its automatically learned latent categorical distribution. Although InfoGANdiscovers digit identities in the balanced data, it produces redundant/incoherent groupings in theimbalanced data. In contrast, our model is able to discover digit identities in the imbalanced data.
Figure 2: Elastic-InfoGAN takes a sampled categorical code from a Gumbel-Softmax distributionand a noise vector to generate fake samples. Apart from the original InfoGAN (Chen et al. (2016))loss functions, we have two additional constraints: (1) We take real images x and create a trans-formed version x0 using identity-preserving operations (e.g., small rotation), and force their inferredlatent code distributions to be close; (2) We also constrain their entropy to be low. The use of dif-ferentiable latent variables from the Gumbel-Softmax enables gradients to flow back to the classprobabilities to update them.
Figure 3: Different ways for unsupervised learning based methods to group unlabeled data; basedon rotation (left) vs. digit identity (right). Here, we show two different groups for each grouping.
Figure 4: Representative image generations on a random imbalanced MNIST split. Each row cor-responds to a learned latent variable. Our approach generates inconsistent images in only row 2whereas Uniform InfoGAN does so in rows 1,2,6,8 and JointVAE does so in rows 3,5,6,7,9,10.
Figure 5: Elastic-InfoGAN image generations on YouTube-Faces. Each column corresponds to alatent variable. Although there are a few redundant latent variables (e.g., last and 5th last columns)or latent variables with multiple identities (e.g., 13th column), in general each latent variable cor-responds to a unique identity with diverse variations in pose, translation, and scale. See Fig. 7 inAppendix for Uniform InfoGAN and JointVAE results.
Figure 6: Uniform interpolation of two continuous latent codes between [-1, 1]: r1 varies in the left,while r2 varies in the right. The captured factors appear to be stroke width by r1, and rotation by r2.
Figure 7: Image generations on YouTube-Faces. Each column corresponds to a latent variable.
