Figure 2: Left: Agent performance on unseen test configurations of the Find and Return scenario.
Figure 4: Analysis of the EgoMap for key steps (different rows) during an episode from the Ordered6-item and Find and Return scenarios. Within each sub-figure: Left column - RGB observations,central column - the three largest PCA components of features mapped in the spatially structuredmemory, right - attention heat map (result of the query) and x,y query position vector. We observethat the agent maps and stores features from key objects and attends to them when they are pertinentto the current stage of the task. For example, for the left figure on the first row at time-step 5 theblue spherical object, which is ordered 4 of 6, is mapped into the agent’s spatial memory. The agentexplores the environment collecting the items in order, it collects item 3 of 6 between time-step 105and 108, shown on rows 2 and 3. As soon as the agent has collected item 3 it queries its internalmemory for the presence of item 4, which is shown by the attention distribution on rows 3 and 4. Onthe last row, time-step 140, the agent observes the item and no longer attempts to query for it, as theitem is in the agent’s field of view.
Figure 5: A synthetic 3-channel top down map. Rotations of two degrees per time-step with naive andglobal reference frame (rows 1 & 2) shown over 180 time-steps. Translations with naive and globalreference frame (rows 3 & 4) shown over 180 time-steps. Distinct degradation of the map features areobserved by time-step 100 and features are barely visible after 180 steps, leading to poor localizationwith self-attention queries. In tasks that span up to 500 time-steps, the blurring of features could havegreatly restricted the EgoMap agent’s performance.
Figure 6: The baseline agent architecture (light blue) augmented with the EgoMap architecture(green), the agent’s hidden state is ht and the spatially structured neural memory Mt . We rely on anoracle (the simulator) to provide the depth buffer Dt and the agent deltas (dx, dy, dθ).
Figure 7: Schematics detailing the operation of the read mechanisms, with global read (left), contextread(middle) and xy-querying (right).
Figure 8: Training curves of held out test set performance on 4-item (top left), 6-item(top-right) andlabyrinth scenarios (bottom).
