Figure 1: Distortion needed for perfect provenance detection (by fco1m0 p) against different signal qualitydegradation levels suffered by the attacker. We measure the amount of distortion the watermarkingscheme must introduce in order to guarantee perfect detection accuracy under a transformation, andcompare with the Broken Arrows zero-bit watermarking scheme.
Figure 2: Sample of a transformation attack on ImageNet (fco1m0p). (a) is a non-watermarked test setimage, (b) is a watermarked version with the minimum necessary watermark required to be correctlyclassified by a detection model when Gaussian noise is added at a standard deviation depicted in (c).
Figure 3:	Average false positive rate offco5mp (non-robust) and fco5mp (robust) onwatermark’s constructed by other water-mark classifiers. Given as a function ofthe average watermark image SSIM.
Figure 4:	Certified accuracy of 200 wa-termarked ImageNet examples. Plot-ted as a function of the `2 radius of ro-bustness. We compare with robustnessguarantees against a non-robust water-mark detection model, that has not beentrained on a set of transformations.
Figure 5: AB experiment. 660 non-watermarked and watermarked audio samplespresented to 1320 people in total. Partici-pants were played the original sample andwatermarked sample and asked to rate howdifferent the original audio was from the wa-termarked version.
Figure 6:	Transformation attack results on Cifar10. Each subfigure is plotted as function of thedistortion introduced by the transformation, and we evaluate for a watermark perturbation rangingfrom = 1/255 to = 33/255. The solid markers are the attack success against watermarked images,and the faded markers, the attack success on non-watermarked images.
Figure 7:	Transformation attack results on ImageNet. Each subfigure is plotted as function of thedistortion introduced by the transformation, and we evaluate for a watermark perturbation rangingfrom = 1/255 to = 12/255. The solid markers are the attack success against watermarked images,and the faded markers, the attack success on non-watermarked images.
Figure 8:	Transformation attack results on audio data. Each marker represents the average attacksuccess versus average PSNR of 10,000 inputs sampled under a transformation. The solid markersare the attack success against watermarked images, and the faded markers, the attack success onnon-watermarked images.
Figure 9:	Distortion needed for perfect provenance detection (by fco1m0 p) against different signal qualitydegradation levels suffered by the attacker. We measure the amount of distortion the watermarkingscheme must introduce in order to guarantee perfect detection accuracy under a transformation, andcompare with the Broken Arrows zero-bit watermarking scheme.
Figure 10:	Comparison of ReSWAT trained using a single sample from the transformation distributionat each training step, and with 25 samples at each training step, for Cifar10, against a Gaussian noiseattack.
