Figure 1: A negative movie review a waste of good performance with a LIME expla-nation and a hierarchical explanation, where the color of each block represents the importance ofthe corresponding word/phrase with respect to the model prediction.
Figure 2: The AOPC and log-odds scores of LSTM on the SST dataset.
Figure 3: InterShapley and ACD for LSTM on a negative movie review, where the importancescores of InterShapley and CD scores are normalized for comparing. LSTM makes wrong pre-diction (positive). Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentiments respectively.
Figure 4:	InterShapley for LSTM and BERT on a positive movie review from the SST dataset, onwhich BERT makes correct prediction (positive), while LSTM makes wrong prediction (negative).
Figure 5:	Hierarchical interpretations for the LSTM model using the bottom-up and top-down ap-proaches respectively. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentiments respec-tively.
Figure 6: The AOPC and log-odds scores of LSTM on IMDB dataset.
Figure 7: The AOPC and log-odds scores of CNN on SST dataset.
Figure 8: The AOPC and log-odds scores of CNN on IMDB dataset.
Figure 9: The AOPC and log-odds scores of BERT on SST dataset.
Figure 10: The AOPC and log-odds scores of BERT on IMDB dataset.
Figure 11: InterShapley for BERT on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on whichBERT makes correct prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentimentsrespectively.
Figure 12:	InterShapley for LSTM on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on whichLSTM makes wrong prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentimentsrespectively.
Figure 13:	ACD for LSTM on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on which LSTM makeswrong prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentiments respectively.
Figure 14: InterShapley for BERT on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on whichBERT makes correct prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentimentsrespectively.
Figure 15: InterShapley for LSTM on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on whichLSTM makes wrong prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentimentsrespectively.
Figure 16: ACD for LSTM on a positive movie review from SST dataset, on which LSTM makeswrong prediction. Red and green colors represent the negative and positive sentiments respectively.
Figure 17: Interfaces of Amazon Mechanical Turk where annotators are asked to guess the model’sprediction based on different explanations.
