Figure 1: Using Tilt-Bot, We collect 15,000 interactions on 60 different objects by tilting them ina tray. When sufficiently tilted, the object slides across the tray and hits the walls of the tray. Thisgenerates sound, which is captured by four contact microphones mounted on each side of the tray.
Figure 2: Here are 12 interactions collected using Tilt-Bot. Each interaction is visualized as threeimages. The left image shows the visual observation of the object before the action is applied alongwith the applied action. The middle image shows the middle image shows the visual observationafter the interaction, while the right image shows the STFT representation of audio generated by 3of the 4 microphones.
Figure 3: To train audio embeddings (a), We perform multi-task learning for instance recognition(top) and action regression (bottom). Once the embedding network is trained, we can use the ex-tracted audio embeddings as object features for downstream tasks like forward model learning (b).
Figure 4: Here we see the top classification errors made by our instance recognition model. Thereare two key failure modes: (a) misclassifications between similar objects that have different visualproperties like the cubes, and (b) when the sound generated is too soft like the misclassification ofthe screwdriver.
Figure 5: Visualization of predictions from our inverse model. Here, the red arrow represents theground truth actions taken by the robot, while the black arrow corresponds to the actions predictedby our action-regression model.
Figure 6: Image retrieval results based on audio embedding. Here, the green box image correspondsto query image and next 3 images in the row (in red) correspond to retrievals.
Figure 7: Forward model predictions: Here, green dot on the image represents the ground truthlocation. Based on the action taken by robot, shown in red arrow in initial state of the tray andcorresponding object ground truth location, forward model tries to predict object location which isshown as a red dot.
Figure 8: Image of objects for which data WaS collected using Tilt-Bot.
