Figure 1: (a) The generic operators for the append and alteration operations in Section 3. (b)(c)Map layouts of the ViZDoom environment. The blue points denote the random spawn points for theDense task, while the orange, red, and purple arrows denote the fixed spawn points of the agentsand their initial orientations for the Sparse , Very Sparse, and Super Sparse tasks, respectively.
Figure 2: Learning curves of the A2C agents trained with the early, middle, and late generations ofthe constructed macros. Please note that “Gen” stands for “generation” for all of the four figures.
Figure 3: (a) Learning curves of the(b) Q*bert.
Figure 4: Learning curves of Curiosity with/without mD for four different ViZDoom tasks.
Figure 5: (a) We compare our methodology to random macros by averaging the episode rewardsof the top 10% performing macros. For action repeat, we pick the best macro from all possiblecandidates. (b) The best macros constructed by our methodology versus the random macros andaction repeat. (c) Distribution of the constructed macros over different ranges of the evaluated meanscores. (d) Comparison of the macros constructed from random and handcrafted initial populations.
Figure A1: Learning curves of the A2C agents using different generations of the constructedmacros. Please note that “Gen” denotes “generation”. Each curve along with the correspondingconfidence interval stands for the average performance of the best macros in the generation (i.e., Qin Algorithm 1).
Figure A2: Learning curves of the baseline methods with/without the constructed macros forevaluating compatibility.
Figure A3: Learning curves of the baseline methods with/without rmA2C for evaluating transferability.
Figure A4: Performance comparison of the macros constructed via Algorithm 1 (the red bars) andthe random construction method described in Section 4.6 (the gray bars) in terms of the meanscores of the last 100 episodes achieved by the A2C agents using the macros. Please note that wepresent only the results of the top 50 performers out of the constructed macros for the Seaquest andDense tasks.
