Figure 1: General view of an SCN: Left: without applying any transformation to its input, an SCNlocates the position of input in the input space through a set of nested simplexes. Right: architectureof an SCN: vi are a given set of visible vertices of a primary simplex in the input space that thesample falls inside. A network of hidden vectors hi are then used to parameterize a sequence ofnested simplexes for locating the input. Each hi is a convex combination of a subset of its precedingvectors. In parallel, another network is used to generate SCN’s output utilizing the output of SCN atall vi and hi , combined with a group of bias values bi .
Figure 2: (a) Second barycentric subdivision of a 2-simplex. (b) First barycentric subdivision of a3-simplex. (c), (d) Nested set of simplexes to get a sample simplex (shown in black) from: (c) thesecond barycentric subdivision of a 2-simplex, (d) the first barycentric subdivision of a 3-simplex.
Figure 3: Approximation of summation of two dimensional Gaussian functions with an SCN. (a)target function, (b) approximated function using an SCN with a depth of 4, (c) the learned subdivisionon the input space.
Figure 4: Comparison ofan SCN with a fully-connected neural network architecture in approximationof specific functions: (a) and (c) indicate the target and fitted functions, (b) and (d) indicate thecomparison in terms of log loss.
Figure 5: Star of a vertex v of a simplicial complex (gray region)Choose l in order that the diameter of simplexes of Y (l) is less than . Let W denotes the Y (l)vertices. Since f is a continuous function, pre-image of an open set in an open set. Therefore, foreach w ∈ W, f-1 (St(w)) is an open set. {f-1 (St(w))}w∈W is an open covering for |X|. Let δrepresents the Lebesgue number of this covering. Choose k such that the diameter of simplexes ofX(k) be less than 2. Denote the vertices of X with V. It can be shown that for each V ∈ V, diameterof St(v) is less than δ (proof is shown in figure 6). So, for each v ∈ V, there exist a w ∈ W suchthat St(v) ⊂ f-1 (St(w)). We define the simplicial map g such that g(v) = w. Also, note thatf(St(v)) ⊂ St(w).
Figure 6: Let A, B be two simplexes containing v . Using triangle inequality for a distance function d,for each a ∈ A, b ∈ B We have: d(a, b) ≤ d(a, V) + d(v, b) < 2 + 2 < δ. This fact shows that thediameter of St(v) is less than or equal to δ.
Figure 7: A geometrical view of how does equation 2 evaluates the simplicial mapping at m-th addedpoint using its preceding vertices ui . A same convex combination of ui used to generate hm isapplied to the corresponding f(ui). This value added with a bias term determines f(hm).
Figure 8: Accuracy of the models on the binary classification of zeros and ones in MNIST.
