Figure 1: Examples of selectivity measures used. Top left: jitterplot of unit 113 in an RNN (underthe superposition constraint) selective to the letter ‘j’ (Bowers et al., 2016). Top middle: jitterplot ofa non-selective unit 160 found in an RNN trained on words one-at-a-time from (Bowers et al., 2016).
Figure 2: Different selectivity measures across the conv5, fc6, and fc7 layers of AlexNet. Red-line:median of data, top and bottom of box edges is the 25th and 75th percentile, whiskers extend toextreme edges of distribution not considered outliers and red crosses are outliers. Green points anddashed lines are the means of the distributions with standard errors. The high levels of selectivityobserved with the precision and CCMAS measures are in stark contrast with the low levels ofselectivity observed with the recall with perfect precision and high false-alarm rates at maximuminformedness.
Figure 3: Data for unit fc61199 . Left: activation jitterplot, black diamonds: Monarch butterflyimages; grey circles: all other classes; white dashed line: threshold for the butterfly class maximuminformedness; blue solid line: threshold for top 60 activations. Middle: histogram of activations ofMonarch butterflies; red dashed line: threshold for the butterfly class maximum informedness; blacksolid line: threshold for top 60 activations. Inset: zoomed-in histogram of all activations across allImageNet classes of unit fc61199 (N.B. this plot shows only the highest 121,586 activations; there are596,734 activations at 0). There are Monarch butterfly images covering the whole range of values,with 72 images (5.8% of the total) having an activation of 0. Right: example ImageNet images withactivations of 0 (top), the mean, 39.2±0.6, (middle), and the maximum, 95, (bottom) of the range.
Figure 4: Example AM images that were either judged by all participants to contain objects (a-c) orto be UninterPretabIe as objects (d-f). The human label for unit conv5183 (a) was ‘dogs'； the mostactive image was of a ‘flat-coated retriever’; CCMAS class was ‘monitor’. For fc6319 (b), subjectsreported ‘green peppers’ or ‘apples’ (all classified as the same broad class in our analysis)； both themost active item and CCMAS class were ‘Granny Smith apples’. For fc8969 (c), humans suggested‘beverage’ or ‘drink’； both the most active item and CCMAS class were ‘eggnog’.
Figure 5: The units with with the highest Network Dissection scores for the category ‘bus’. Thescatter plots, precision, and CCMAS scores all indicate a low selectivity for this category. bluesquares: ‘school bus’； red pentagons: ‘trolleybus’； green stars: ‘minibus’； grey circles: other classes.
Figure A1: Example screen from the identification task shown to participants as part of the instructions.
Figure A2: Example activation maximisation images for unit conv5.65. These images were judgedby humans to not contain any interpretable objects in common (although the reader may agree thatthere are some shape and colour similarities in the images).
Figure A3: Example activation maximisation images for unit conv5.183. These images were judgedby humans to contain some interpretable images, in this case, of the type ‘dogs’.
Figure A4: Example activation maximisation images for unit fc6.1199. Whilst there are some butterflywing shapes in these images, there are not obvious butterflies. N.B. the second highest activatingclass for this unit is ladybirds, and there are some orange round shapes that could conceivably beladybug-alikes.
Figure A5: Example of where the CCMAS does not match intuitive understandings of selectivity.
