Figure 1: (left to right) Interpolation (projected onto two selected dimensions) for a semicircledistribution: green - linear, grey - consecutive interpolation steps, red - final proposed interpolation;values of the proposed reality index ri for consecutive points in the linear interpolation; values of rifor points in the optimised interpolation.
Figure 2: Examples of results for linear interpolation (top row in each example) and our results(bottom row in each example) for Celeb-A dataset, with a semicircle prior trained DCGAN. Observethat since in the linear interpolation the middle point is far from the density of the data, we can oftenobserve in it some artefacts.
Figure 3: Examples of results for linear interpolation (top rows of interpolation pairs) and our FID-score based results (bottom rows of interpolation pairs) for Celeb-A dataset. The interpolation wasoptimised had 50 midpoints, and we show here 10 of them.
Figure 4: Linear (top) and our interpolation (bottom) in the WAE (Tolstikhin et al., 2017) model.
Figure 5: Interpolation points in DCGAN model trained with normal prior. In each pair the toprepresents the linear path and the bottom shows the results of our optimisation procedure. Each lineconsists of 10 equally spaced images selected from the 50 points that form the path.
Figure 6: Top: Projections (see (27)) of the latent sample’s density (blue dots), linear (green line)and proposed (red line) interpolations shown in Fig. 5 from top to bottom, respectively. Bottom:The squared L2 distances between consecutive points and the realism index ri of each point in thepath from the last example in Fig. 5. Left: The initial linear path. Right: The path at the end ofoptimisation procedure.
Figure 7: Top: Interpolation points in DCGAN model trained with semicircle prior. In each pair thetop represents the linear path and the bottom shows the results of our optimisation procedure. Eachline consists of 10 equally spaced images selected from the 50 points that form the path. Bottom:Selected projections of the latent sample’s density (blue dots), linear (green line) and proposed (redline) interpolations shown in ‘top‘ part together with the interpolation progress (in gray).
Figure 8: Linear and proposed interpolation paths for the MNIST dataset (a semicircle latent priormodel in left column, a multidimensional normal in right column) in a DCGAN model.
Figure 9: Comparison of interpolations in VAE (left) and WAE (right) models. The top line is thelinear interpolation, the bottom one is the obtained with use of the density realism index approach.
Figure 10: Interpolations (projected defines by (27)) for a semicircle distribution: green - linear,grey - consecutive interpolation steps, red - final proposed interpolation. The picture on the leftshows result of our method without ‘Optimisation procedure‘, and right side with optimisation.
Figure 11: The squared L2 distances between consecutive points in the last example path from Fig. 2for our interpolation and different values of ε for riε (see eq. (4)).
