Figure 1: Left: Method description of training-free uncertainty estimation: Apply infer-transformation T (top) and infer-noise or infer-dropout P (bottom) to a trained neural network Fduring inference for N times. Right: Examples of uncertainty maps generated using our proposedmethod in two different tasks, single image super resolution and monocular depth estimation.
Figure 2: Different locations for infer-noise and infer-dropout in SRGAN and SRresnet for superresolution. For each experiment, the noise is injected at a single location with one perturbation level.
Figure 3: Block-wise and pixel-wise uncertainty (variance) maps generated using infer-transformation, infer-dropout, MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) compared with L1 loss map.
Figure 4: Left: Correlation changes with different locations where dropout and noise layers areinserted. Various dropout rates and noise levels have been evaluated. We compare our infer-noiseand infer-dropout with baseline MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). Location 0 is right after theinput; location 4 is right before the last convolutional layer; location 1, 2, 3 are intermediate layers.
Figure 5: Left: We compare SR results that use loss reweighted by variance map and that do not.
Figure 6: Different locations for infer-noise injection in the FCRN model for depth estimation Task.
Figure 7: Correlation is varied with different dropout rates. Infer-dropout is compared with baselineMC-dropout, evaluated on the SRresnet model for super-resolution task and the FCRN model fordepth estimation task.
Figure 8: Visualization of error map and uncertainty maps generated from infer-dropout, each vari-ance map is from a different location, evaluated on the SRGAN model on set14 dataset for super-resolution task.
Figure 9:	Visualization of uncertainty maps and error map from infer-transformation, infer-dropoutcompared with baseline MC-dropout, evaluated on the SRGAN model on Set14 dataset for super-resolution task.
Figure 10:	Visualization of uncertainty maps and error map from infer-transformation, infer-dropoutcompared with baseline MC-dropout, evaluated on the FCRN model on NYU depth dataset V2 fordepth estimation task.
