Figure 1: Illustration of different noise models. Each color represents an observed class y: circlesindicate y = y, while crosses indicate y = y. The size of each point represents the confidence scoresin the label y: the bigger the point is, the more confident it is. In the CCN model, the noise functiononly depends on the label of each instance. In the IDN and CSIDN models, the noise functiondepends on the observed instance x. To illustrate the IDN model, we show a special case calledboundary-consistent noise, i.e., points that lie close to the decision boundary are more likely to bemislabelled. Note the CSIDN model varies from the IDN model via confidence scores (Section 2.3).
Figure 2: The limitation of the small-loss approaches in the IDN model. (a) Clean distribution. (b)instance-dependent noise in the direction w = (0, 1) with an average corruption rate of 40%: pointstowards the upper region are more likely to be corrupted than points towards the bottom region. (c)Density map of the instances selected by a small-loss approach at epoch 10. The sample selectiongets biased towards clean regions. Since the clean and noisy regions have different distributions,selecting most instances from clean regions creates a covariate-shift between the training and testdistributions, which can greatly degrades performances.
Figure 3: The test accuracy on synthetic datasets with different levels of IDN noise.
Figure 4: The test accuracy on real-world datasets with different levels of IDN noise.
Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis on the synthetic dataset: a zero-mean Gaussian noise of standarddeviation σ ∈ {0.0, 0.3, 0.6} is added to each confidence score before running ILFC with the noisyconfidence scores.
Figure 6:	Synthetic dataset. The clean distribution (a) consists in three classes of concentric circles.
Figure 7: DeCision boundaries of the learned Classifier for the ILFC model (left Column) and theLq norm model (right Column). In the presenCe of highly noisy regions, a Classifier that does notinClude any instanCe-level information will degenerate in those regions, while the ILFC approaChstays Consistent with the Clean distribution.
