Figure 1: CDEP allows a practitioner to penalize both a model’s prediction and the correspondingexplanation.
Figure 2: Example images from the ISIC dataset. Half of the benign lesion images include a patchin the image.
Figure 3: Visualizing heatmaps for correctly predicted exampes from the ISIC skincancer test set.
Figure 4: ColorMNIST: the test set shapes remain the same as the training set, but the colors areinverted. A vanilla network trained on this training set will get 0% accuracy on the test set.
Figure 5: Example sentences from the SST dataset with artificially induced bias on gender.
Figure S1:	Example sentences from the variant 1 of the biased SST dataset with decoy variables ineach sentence.
Figure S2:	Example sentences from the variant 2 of the SST dataset with artificially induced bias onarticles (”the”, ”a”). Bias was only induced on the sentences where those articles were used (27%of the dataset).
Figure S3:	Example sentences from the variant 3 of the SST dataset with artificially induced bias onarticles (”he”, ”she”). Bias was only induced on the sentences where those articles were used (2%of the dataset).
Figure S4:	Sampling distribution for ColorMNIST13Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure S5:	Results on ColorMNIST (Test Accuracy). All averaged over thirty runs. CDEP is theonly method that captures and removes color bias.
Figure S5:	Results on ColorMNIST (Test Accuracy). All averaged over thirty runs. CDEP is theonly method that captures and removes color bias.
Figure S6:	Sample segmentation for the ISIC task.
Figure S7:	Heatmaps for benign samples from ISIC16Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Image	Vanilla	CDEPFigure S8: Heatmaps for cancerous samples from ISIC17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020A different spurious correlation that we noticed was that proportionally more images showing skincancer will have a ruler next to the lesion. This is the case because doctors often want to show areference for size if they diagnosed that the lesion is cancerous. Even though the spurious correlationis less pronounced (in a very rough cursory count, 13% of the cancerous and 5% of the benign imagescontain some sort of measure), the networks learnt to recognize and exploit this spurious correlation.
Figure S8: Heatmaps for cancerous samples from ISIC17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020A different spurious correlation that we noticed was that proportionally more images showing skincancer will have a ruler next to the lesion. This is the case because doctors often want to show areference for size if they diagnosed that the lesion is cancerous. Even though the spurious correlationis less pronounced (in a very rough cursory count, 13% of the cancerous and 5% of the benign imagescontain some sort of measure), the networks learnt to recognize and exploit this spurious correlation.
Figure S9: Both networks learnt that proportionally more images with malignant lesions feature aruler next to the lesion. To make comparison easier, we visualize the heatmap by multiplying it withthe image. Visible regions are important for classification.
