Figure 1: Evaluating the original f -VIM framework (anditS ILfO counterpart, f -VIMO) in the Ant (S ∈ R111) andHopper (S ∈ R11) domainS with the Total Variation diS-tance. f -VIM/VIMO-Sigmoid denoteS our inStantiation ofthe frameworkS, detailed in SectionS 4.2 and 4.3. Note that,in both plotS, the lineS for TV-VIM and TV-VIMO overlap.
Figure 2: Comparing our TV-VIM and TV-VIMO frameworks (Equations 8 & 9) with sigmoidrewards against the original TV-VIM formulation (Equation 7) and its TV-VIMO counterpart withactivations prescribed by Nowozin et al. (2016) (Table 1).
Figure 3: Comparing f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments with f -divergences:GAN, Kullback-Leibler (KL), reverse KL (RKL), and Total Variation distance (TV). We also ex-amine the effect of discriminator regularization (Equation 10) with ψ = 10 per Mescheder et al.
Figure 4: Evaluating f -VIM and f -VIMO with and without regularization across four MuJoCoenvironments with varying amounts of expert demonstration data.
Figure 5: Comparing f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments with f -divergences:GAN, Kullback-Leibler (KL), reverse KL (RKL), and Total Variation distance (TV).
Figure 6: Evaluating f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments with varying amountsof expert demonstration data.
Figure 7: Learning curves for f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments using only 1expert demonstration.
Figure 8: Learning curves for f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments using only 5expert demonstrations.
Figure 9: Learning curves for f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments using only10 expert demonstrations.
Figure 10: Learning curves for f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments using only15 expert demonstrations.
Figure 11: Learning curves for f -VIM and f -VIMO across four MuJoCo environments using only20 expert demonstrations.
Figure 12: Learning curves for KL-VIM and KL-VIMO in Ant with 20 expert demonstrations usingthe regular and swapped variational lower bound.
Figure 13: Learning curves for KL-VIM and KL-VIMO in Hopper with 20 expert demonstrationsusing the regular and swapped variational lower bound.
