Figure 1: (a) The diagram of sensor placement (black arrows) and TUN(red arrows). TUN consistsof two steps: imagination step and inspection step to generate the possible measurements and eval-uate the task-specific information gain at un-observed locations. (b) Graphical models of the twosteps in TUN. Instances of measurement xk at un-observed locations are generated in the imagina-tion step. Then those generated measurements are used to evaluate the information gain for the taskin inspection step.
Figure 2: Example of the generation step on 1D spectrum dataset. The dashed line is the truespectrum and the solid spots are the observations. The generated instances are in colorful solidlines. Left: 10 imagined spectrums based on single observation. Right: 10 imagined spectrumsbased on three observations. The variation in the generated samples is mainly from scales and isindependent of the task.
Figure 3: Left: x-ray security screening system. 8 different directions(locations) uniformly dis-tributed within 180° are available to illuminate the object. The object is randomly rotated along Zaxis with an obstacle. Additive Gaussian noise is adapted on the measurements. Right: examples ofmeasurements at 8 locations.
Figure 4: The imagination step of TUN on high dimensional dataset. Left: The 3 instances ofthe generations at location 6 and 7 given the observations at location 4. The generated instancesare different in labels(digit 0 and 7) and fonts, but they all keep the corner feature occurred in theobservation.Middle: The generations given two observations at location 4 and 5. The generatedinstances are much more convergent as more information is extracted from the observations. Right:The ground truth of the measurements at location 6 and 7.
Figure 5: Task-specific feature distribution. We visualize the initial intermediate feature distributionin the inspector network using t-SNE. Clearly the features become more scatty at further locationsfrom the observed location. The feature space is colored by locations. Region 1: Features of gener-ated instances at the observed location. Region 2: Features at locations that are close to the observedlocation. Region 3: away from observed location. Region 3: Features at locations far from the ob-served locations.
Figure 6: Entropy estimation: (a) The remaining entropy at un-observed locations given a singleobservation at location 5. The optimal next location in this step is location 2 at which the expectedremaining entropy is least. (b) As we obtain the measurement at location 2 following TUN, theestimated remaining entropy at all the un-observed locations are almost zeros, indicating that themodel is quite confident about the label with those observations.
Figure 7: Accuracy and entropy at different numbers of inquiries for TUN, Gaussian process(GP)based and random sampling(RS) strategies. The advantages of sensor placement strategies starts attwo observations. The proposed framework, TUN, outperforms GP and RS strategies consistently.
