Figure 1: Deep CrOiSe Scattering Network Architecture for an input signal y - Special case of 3wavelet families.
Figure 2: Sparse Deep Croise Scattering Network representation - Paths: 1 → 1:, 1 → 2,1 → 3with 1 : Morlet, 2 : Paul, 3: Gammatone - J1= 5, Q1=8, J2=4, Q2=1Finger snap(a)	(b)Figure 3: Sparse Croise Latent Wavelet Family Representation: (a) Cocktail: Crying Baby &Bird song & Motorcycle - 15657.wav (c) Finger Snap Latent Representation - 349.wavthat can be formally defined as a binary classification task, where each label corresponds to thepresence or absence of birds. Each signal is 10sec. long, and has been sampled at 44.1Khz. Theevaluation of the results is performed via the Area Under Curve metric on 33% of the data. The ex-periments are repeated 50 times. The total audio length of this dataset is thus of slightly more than11 hours of audio recordings. To put in comparison, it is about 10× larger than CIFAR10 in term of7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018numbers of scalar values in the dataset. The results comparing our algorithm to the DSN with eachof the wavelet family used in both SDCSN and DCSN are in Table 1. Both the SDCSN and DCSNoutperform from at least 20% accuracy of any DSN proving the enhancement of the scattering fea-ture by including the crossed latent representations. For all the architectures, the octave and qualityparameters of the layers are J1 = 5, Q1 = 8, J2 = 4, Q2 = 1. As the feature of interests are birdssongs, only high frequency content requires high resolution, the thresholding is applied per windowof 216 representing ≈ 1.5sec.
Figure 3: Sparse Croise Latent Wavelet Family Representation: (a) Cocktail: Crying Baby &Bird song & Motorcycle - 15657.wav (c) Finger Snap Latent Representation - 349.wavthat can be formally defined as a binary classification task, where each label corresponds to thepresence or absence of birds. Each signal is 10sec. long, and has been sampled at 44.1Khz. Theevaluation of the results is performed via the Area Under Curve metric on 33% of the data. The ex-periments are repeated 50 times. The total audio length of this dataset is thus of slightly more than11 hours of audio recordings. To put in comparison, it is about 10× larger than CIFAR10 in term of7Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018numbers of scalar values in the dataset. The results comparing our algorithm to the DSN with eachof the wavelet family used in both SDCSN and DCSN are in Table 1. Both the SDCSN and DCSNoutperform from at least 20% accuracy of any DSN proving the enhancement of the scattering fea-ture by including the crossed latent representations. For all the architectures, the octave and qualityparameters of the layers are J1 = 5, Q1 = 8, J2 = 4, Q2 = 1. As the feature of interests are birdssongs, only high frequency content requires high resolution, the thresholding is applied per windowof 216 representing ≈ 1.5sec.
Figure 4: Robustness Evaluation(a) SDCSN - Path: 1 → 1, 1:GammatoneFigure 5: Histogram of activation of the first layer - signal and decomposition are provided in 2crucial information, as we demonstrated experimentally, allowing to significantly outperform stan-dard scattering networks. We then motivated and proposed analytical derivation of an optimal over-complete basis threhsolding being input adaptive. By providing greater sparsity in the representationbut also a measure of filter-bank fitness. Again, we provided experimental validation of the use ofour thresholding technique proving the robustness implied by such non-linearity. Finally, the abilityto perform active denoising has been demonstrated crucial as we demonstrated that even in largescale setting, standard machine learning approach coupled with the SN fail to discard non-stationarynoise. This coupled with the denoising ability of our approach should provide real world applicationthe stability needed for consistent results and prediction control.
Figure 5: Histogram of activation of the first layer - signal and decomposition are provided in 2crucial information, as we demonstrated experimentally, allowing to significantly outperform stan-dard scattering networks. We then motivated and proposed analytical derivation of an optimal over-complete basis threhsolding being input adaptive. By providing greater sparsity in the representationbut also a measure of filter-bank fitness. Again, we provided experimental validation of the use ofour thresholding technique proving the robustness implied by such non-linearity. Finally, the abilityto perform active denoising has been demonstrated crucial as we demonstrated that even in largescale setting, standard machine learning approach coupled with the SN fail to discard non-stationarynoise. This coupled with the denoising ability of our approach should provide real world applicationthe stability needed for consistent results and prediction control.
Figure 6: On the left a Morlet wavelet in the time domain where the dashed line is the imaginarypart, the solid line is the real part, and the black envelope is the complex modulus, on the right aMorlet wavelet in the frequency domain.
Figure 7: On the upper (bottom) left a m = 4 (m = 10) Gammatone wavelet in the time domainwhere the dashed line is the imaginary part and the solid line is the real part, on the upper (bottom)right a m = 4 (m = 10) wavelet in the frequency domain.
Figure 8: On the upper (bottom) left a m = 2 (m = 6) Paul wavelet in the time domain where thedashed line is the imaginary part and the solid line is the real part, on the upper (bottom) right am = 2 (m = 6) wavelet in the frequency domain.
Figure 9: From top to bottom: Morlet wavelet filter bank, Gammatone wavelet filter bank withm = 4, Paul wavelet filter bank m = 2Input: wavelet family: f ∈ F, signal length: N, number of octaves: J, number of wavelets peroctave: Q, scale weight: α, wavelet parameter: mOutput: D : Filter bank of the wavelet family fInitialize the wavelet frequency domain: ω ∈ [-π, π]while j < J * Q doλj = αf 2 j - Set UP the scale for the jth children wavelet -Dj = ψf (λj * ω) - Compute the children wavelet at the given scale λj -endAlgorithm 1: Compute Filter bank for any continuous wavelet family f ∈ FFinally, in order to guarantee the admissibility criterion one has to verify that all the wavelets arezeros-mean and square norm one. The first one is easily imposed by setting the wavelet to be nullaround ω = 0 as it has been done to efficiently use the Morlet wavelet by Antoine et. al Farge (1992);Antoine et al. (1993). Then, because of Parseval equality and the energy conservation principle, thesecond one can be achieved by a re-normalization in the frequency domain of each atom.
Figure 10: Histogram of activation of the second layer given in schemaC Denoising in an orthogonal basis frameworkAssuming that the observed signal y, is corrupted with white noise,y = x+,	(25)where is a vector of i.i.d centered normal distributions N(0, σ2). Now we define the estimate of xby xw,D such that:'	Xw,d (y ) = W T DS Wy	(26)where W denotes the orthogonal basis and D S is a diagonal binary operator such that,DiS,i=δi=01iiffii∈∈US	(27), where U and S denote respectively the set of selected and unselected wavelet coefficients. We alsodefine DU such that I = DU + DS. This estimate corresponds to a thresholding operation in thenew basis and the inverse transform of this truncated representation.
