Figure 1: Comparison of anomaly maps (before thresholding) of the proposed method with theSOTA methods in the MVTec-AD dataset. Except for the proposed method, anomaly maps ofexisting methods are normalized to [0, 1].
Figure 2: Overview of the training process of the proposed AnoSeg. AnoSeg generates recon-structed images and anomaly maps. To directly generate anomaly maps, AnoSeg applies three noveltechniques: hard augmentation, adversarial learning, and coordinate channel concatenation.
Figure 3: Our synthetic anomaly data augmentation. The synthetic anomaly data is generated byseveral hard augmentations and Cutpaste (Li et al. (2021)). Synthetic anomaly data is generated byapplying a rotation, perm, color jitter, and Cutpaste for each step. Hard augmentations are appliedwith a 50% chance.
Figure 4: Overall process of the coordinate chan-nel concatenation.
Figure 5: An overview of the proposed anomalydetection method. To obtain anomaly score, thepair of images reconstructed from the anomalymap and the anomaly detector (fake pair) are com-pared with the pair of the normal mask and theinput image (real pair) using a discriminator.
Figure 6: (a) Comparison on AUROC and IoU using Anomaly map and (b) mean IoU changeaccording to the threshold for each category. The x-axis and y-axis represent a threshold and IoU,respectively.
Figure 7: Qualitative results on the MVTec AD dataset for (first row) input image, (second row) GTmask, and (third row) proposed anomaly map.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of the ablation study to illustrate the performance of the anomaly seg-mentation on the MVtec AD dataset.
Figure 9: Overview of the training process of the proposed anomaly detection method.
Figure 10: IoU results for each category in the MVTec AD dataset according to the threshold change.
Figure 11: IoU results for each category in the MVTec AD dataset according to the threshold change.
Figure 12: IoU results for each category in the MVTec AD dataset according to the threshold change.
Figure 13: Defect segmentation on MVTec AD dataset. For each sample image, there are an inputimage, the proposed anomaly map, and its GT mask from left to right.
Figure 14: Defect segmentation on MVTec AD dataset. For each sample image, there are an inputimage, the proposed anomaly map, and its GT mask from left to right.
Figure 15: Defect segmentation on MVTec AD dataset. For each sample image, there are an inputimage, the proposed anomaly map, and its GT mask from left to right.
Figure 16: Defect segmentation on MVTec AD dataset. For each sample image, there are an inputimage, the proposed anomaly map, and its GT mask from left to right.
Figure 17: Defect segmentation on MVTec AD dataset. For each sample image, there are an inputimage, the proposed anomaly map, and its GT mask from left to right.
