Figure 1: An illustration of the three types of adversarial attack. A white-box attack can access to the wholemodel; a score-based attack can access to the soft-label output layer; a decision-based attack can only accessthe predicted label. With an unnoticeable perturbation, ”Pinwheel” is classified as “Rapeseed”2019); Li et al. (2021)) solve the problem via zeroth-order optimization methods which require tensof thousands of queries to estimate the gradient in every optimization step.
Figure 2: Workflow of Bayesian Optimization in BO-DBAWith objective function g0(δ0) available, the optimization problem (4) is solvable using the BayesianOptimization. Adopting the logic in Figure (2), the attacker will query the boundary radius g0(δ0)on the searching direction θ generated by the low dimensional input δ0 . The optimizer models thedistribution of distances over the input space and acquires the next most possible optimal input forquerying until an adversarial example near enough is found. In particular, for each iteration t, basedon observation set {δi0, g0(δi0)}it=-11, we use Gaussian process to model the radius distribution of allpossible directions. Then we use Acquisition Function to select δt0 with the highest probability togenerate the lowest radius (smallest perturbation) according to the statistic distribution. Then wequery the model to compute g0(δt0) and add the result {δt0 , g0(δt0)} to the observation set.
Figure 3: Average distance versus query budgets on ImageNet with ResNet, Inception, and ResNet with adver-sarial example detection, and Inception with adversarial example detection from left to right columns. 1st row:untargeted l∞ distance. 2nd row: untargeted Attack Success RateResults: Figure 3 shows the average l∞ distance and attack success rate against the query bud-gets. Column 1&2 compares the l∞ distortion and attack success rate of our framework with fourbaseline DBA attacks on the defenseless classifier. We can see that BO-DBA consistently achievesa smaller distortion within 1000 queries than baseline methods. As a derivative-free method, BO-DBA can converge within 200 query budgets, while zeroth order optimization based techniques likeOPT-Attack, HSJA and SignOPT2 need over 15,000 queries to achieve the same level of pertur-bation distortion (Chen et al. (2020)). Although RayS adopts another derivative-free method, it isable to achieve similar perturbation distortion only after around 1000 queries. The obvious advan-tage of query efficiency of BO-DBA is mainly attributed to facts: 1) BO-DBA adopts the BayesianOptimization to utilize the statistical information while RayS relies soley on a straightforward hi-erarchical searching; 2) BO-DBA reduces the searching space via perturbation generators, whichresults in a much higher convergence rate. Similar results can be seen in the Attack Success Rate asshown in row 2 of Figure 3. Column 3&4 of Figure 3 shows the l∞ distortion and the attack successrate against the number of queries for all baseline methods on classifier equipped with adversarialexample detection mechanism. Again we can see that BO-DBA achieves the highest overall attacksuccess rate and best query efficiency as compared with the other four hard-label attack baselines.
