Figure 1: Problem of training a biased dataset. The figure represents a feature space. The whitecircles and the black circles are the training samples, and the white squares and the black squaresare the test samples. We train a model to classify whether each face is young or old. The desirableclassifier is the solid line, but if the model is trained to classify according to the dotted line, theclassification result will be poor.
Figure 2: Overall architecture of neural networks with the bias prediction network. Generally animage classification model consists of a feature embedding network φf and a classification networkφc . Here, the bias prediction network φb is following the feature embedding network. The biasprediction network gets the CNN-structured embedded features as input, and outputs bias predictionresult. From the result, the bias prediction loss Lbias is obtained by calculating the cross-entropybetween the resized raw image and the bias prediction result. The classification loss Lclass is calcu-lated by the original model, and used to calculate the total loss Ltotal . The image samples are fromAdience dataset.
Figure 3: The detailed architecture of the bias prediction network φb predicting color bias. A rawimage is resized and split into three channels, and then the value of each pixel is grouped into eightintervals to match the size to the output of the bias prediction network. Then the bias prediction lossis obtained by calculating the cross-entropy between the data of each channel and the output of thenetwork.
Figure 4: The results of the performance of the bias prediction network on the biased Adiencedataset. EGNN was used as the original model. The horizontal axis represents the number ofclasses. The vertical axis represents the performance (accuracy) depending on the application of thebias prediction network. In both tests, the bias prediction network improved the performance of theoriginal EGNN.
Figure 5: Several examples of the color-filtered miniImageNet datasets and the experimental resultsfor each dataset.
Figure 6: The results of the performance of the bias prediction network depending on the size of theminiImageNet dataset. EGNN was used as a base model. The horizontal axis represents the numberof the samples of each class. The vertical axis represents the performance (accuracy) dependingon the application of the bias prediction network. The lower the number of the samples used, thegreater the effect of the bias prediction network.
