Figure 1: Overview of LASSI. The left part shows the data producer who captures the set ofindividuals similar to x by interpolating along the attribute vector apale. The data producer thenuses adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) and center smoothing (Kumar & Goldstein, 2021) tocompute a representation that provably maps all similar points into the '2-ball of radius res aroundzCS. The right part shows the data consumer who can then certify individual fairness, i.e., prove thatall similar individuals receive the same classification outcome, of the end-to-end model by checkingwhether the certified radius obtained via randomized smoothing (Cohen et al., 2019) exceeds rCS.
Figure 2: SimilarityWe consider two individuals x and x0 to be similar if they differ onlyin their sensitive attributes, e.g., skin color, and all the other attributesare the same. However, such semantic attributes cannot be convenientlycaptured directly in the input (pixel) space of the data, so we leverage thelatent space of a generative model G. Our first step is to compute a vectora associated with the attribute, such that interpolating along the directionof a in the latent space, and reconstructing back to the input space resultsin a meaningful semantic transformation of that attribute. This in itself isan active research area with various approaches for computing a (Higginset al., 2017; Denton et al., 2019).
Figure 3: Center-smoothing∀t0 ∈ [-, ] .
Figure 4: Points from the similarity set Si (x) for various x, as reconstructed by our Glow model.
Figure 5: A sample shape at 15 different ground truth orientations (original) and the corresponding re-constructions obtained from interpolating along the generative model’s attribute vector (interpolated).
Figure 6: Sampled shapes at 15 different ground truth orientations. The original (above) and thecorresponding reconstructions (below) obtained from interpolating along the generative model’sattribute vector are grouped together.
Figure 7: Varying the sensitive attribute Pale_Skin.
Figure 8: Varying the sensitive attribute Pale_Skin.
Figure 9: Varying the sensitive attribute Young.
Figure 10: Varying the sensitive attribute Young.
