Figure 1: Synthetic noisy images generated by (b) ad-ditive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), a homoscedas-tic Gaussian model; (c) noise level function (NLF), asignal-dependent heteroscedastic Gaussian model; and(d) CoNo, the proposed unsupervised contrastive learn-ing framework. Compared with AWGN and NLF,CoNo does not have the inductive bias caused by thestatistical independence between the pixels. CoNo gen-erates noise with unnoticeable local patterns, whichcan be used to mimic the non-photon noise (e.g. fixed-pattern noise and spatially-correlated noise). The im-ages are from the Kodak dataset (Malvar et al., 2004).
Figure 2: Illustration of the framework of CoNo. The random crops in shape H ×W ×1 sampled from theRAW image (only a positive pair is shown) are rearranged into 4-channel (in order RGGB in this work) signaltensors in shape H∕2×W∕2×4. Then, the signal tensors and additive white GauSSian noise (AWGN) samplesare fed into the network to generate the noise for the instance-wise discrimination pretext task. The imagesdisplayed are proportionally scaled for better visualization.
Figure 3: Synthesized noisy images at the same noisevariance level (σ = 10): (a) clean images: (b) AWGN,(c) NLF, (d) CoNo. CoNo shows more local noise pat-terns than the other two models.
Figure 4: Generated noisy images at different noisevariance level (σ ∈ {10, 20, 30}). In contrast toAWGN and NLF, CoNo tends to generate larger noisein the bright regions.
Figure 5: Scatter plots of pixel intensity and noise atdifferent noise variance level (σ ∈ {10, 20, 30}) forFig. 4. The horizontal axis represents the pixel intensity([0, 255]). The vertical axis represents the noise at eachpixel (normalized by 255). In contrast to AWGN andNLF, the noise generated by CoNo tends to show largervariance for high pixel intensity.
Figure 6: Stochasticity of the noisy images generated by CoNo. At each row,the first image is the clean image and the other four images are the generatednoisy images given the same clean image but different random sample z (σ =10 for the displayed images).
