Figure 1: Bar plots comparing expected calibration error (ECE) on CIFAR-10 at 25 epochs (8800steps) for standard training and 6 different combinations of pacing function parameters. We com-pare results on curriculum ordering (left), anti-curriculum ordering (center), and random-curriculum(right). A linear pacing function is used for all trials. The error bars show the standard deviation ofthe measurements. It can be seen that one configuration (a = 0.8, b = 0.2) produces lower ECEthan standard training considering the error. The same effect is not seen in the random-curriculumwhere the same parameters performer poorer than standard training.
Figure 2: Bar plot comparing the ECE on the testset of CIFAR-100 at 25 epochs (8,800 steps) usingcurriculum learning ordering models. We com-pare the same 6 combinations of pacing functionparameters with the standard training model (left-most). Similar to CIFAR-10, a = 0.8, b = 0.2produces lower ECE than standard training.
Figure 3: Graphs capturing the change in calibration over time by tracking the change in ECE ontest set per training epoch for CIFAR-10 (a) and CIFAR-100 (b) at 25 epochs where the curriculaapproaches are found to have the most benefit. Three different orderings are shown: curriculum(left), anti-curriculum (centre), and random (right). The trends for standard training can be seen inthe bright red line. We test six configurations of pacing function parameters using a linear pacingfunction. The most prominent observations are: (1) curriculum and anti-curriculum learning havenear identical trends; (2) they both differ from random ordering; (3) the curricula-based approachesare prone to severe miscalibration early on during training that gradually improves to finish evenbelow the error of standard training.
Figure 4: Top row: CIFAR-10 results. Bottom row: CIFAR-100 re-sults. Graphs comparing the progression of test ECE over the courseof training. Left graph is for 100 epochs (35,200 training steps) andright is 25 epochs (8,800 training steps). Note the difference in howdifferent types of pacing functions converge to their final calibrationerror despite the same parameters and especially the sudden improve-ment in calibration seen with the step function.
Figure 5: Bar plot showing the high effectivenessof curriculum learning and anti-curriculum learn-ing at reducing calibration error on the test setcompared to regular training with 40% and 80%label noise at 25 epochs on CIFAR-100.
Figure 6: Graphs showing the change in model calibration over time under noisy data while com-paring standard training, curriculum learning, and anti-curriculum learning. The curricula share thesame linear pacing function at a = 0.8, b = 0.2 We track the change in ECE on test set per trainingepoch for CIFAR-100 at 40% and 80% label noise. (a) shows results at 100 epochs and (b) at 25epochs. There is a stark difference in the trends between the two training times that favours standardtraining for 100 epochs and the curricula approaches for 25 epochs. The noise level strongly affectsthe trends in a difficult to predict manner.
Figure 7: Graphs showing the progression of ECE on the test set calculated at every dynamic epochduring training for CIFAR-10 (top) and CIFAR-100 (bottom) at 100 epochs to measure the cali-bration of the model over the course of training. We compare 3 different orderings: curriculum(left), anti-curriculum (centre) and random (right) at the same 6 combinations of a and b discussedin section 4. We also include the trend of standard training in bright red.
