Figure 1: Combined Architecture ProposedLets denote the encoder and decoder parameters as θe and θd, respectively. An input x ∈ Rd ismapped to a latent space encoding ze ∈ Rm. Bassani & Araujo (2015) have shown that it is easier toadjust the parameters of SOM when the input dimensions are scaled to the [0, 1] interval. To maintainthis behavior, ze is computed by ze = sigmoid(fθe (x)). The encoding is then fed as input to aforward pass of SOMRL and a decoder pass of the AE architecture. At this point, a reconstruction Xof the input can be computed as X = ge4 (ze). This component is used to calculate the reconstruction1Complete source code provided as supplementary material. It will be made public after acceptance.
Figure 2:	Histograms of relevances (relevance values on the x-axes) for MNIST and Fashion-MNIST.
Figure 3:	The decoded prototype on the left (a). Perturbation in dimensions with relevances valuesless then 0.3 (b), 0.4 (c), and 0.5(d) is inserted. For small values, the prototype does not lose itscharacteristics. However, when the relevance value increases, the prototype starts to degrade. Whenonly relevant dimensions are changed (e), the node loses its original characteristic.
Figure 4: Latent factors learned on MNIST: Transition from 0 to 3, and to 8 obtained by changingonly relevant features in the latent space.
Figure 5: t-SNE for MNIST and Fashion-MNIST Test Data alongside decoded SOMRL Prototypes.
Figure 6: Scatter plots of the NMI obtained with SOMRL as a function of its parameter at for thedatasets on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST varying the range from [0.95, 0.999] to [0.99, 0.999], andfrom [0.98, 0.999] to [0.99, 0.999], respectively(c) at [0.95, 0.999]: MNISTA.3 Undestanding PrototypesTo illustrate some interpretations that DC-SOMRL has learned w.r.t. input classes, we implementeda function for the intersection of clusters. First, the prototypes in the latent space are decoded. Then,a confusion matrix is computed to help us at identifying clusters that may represent the same classes.
Figure 7: Plots of the Purity and the NMI obtained with the DC-SOMRL over each batch forwardstep for the validation datasets on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST.
Figure 8: Reconstruction of prototypes representing the number 0 and their intersection.
Figure 9: Prototypes representing the number 4 and their intersection.
Figure 10: On the left, a column with the prototypes. On the right, the top ten samples closest to theprototypes.
