Figure 1: Overview of the proposed positional encoding scheme. Positions are encoded as equidistantsamples from shifted basis functions (embedders). The shifts are determined by the correspondingcoordinate positions we are wanting to embed. In (a) and (b), x1 and x2 are encoded as samples fromshifted Gaussians with a higher and a lower standard deviation, respectively. Note that we need ahigher number of samples for (b) due to higher bandwidth (see Sec. 2). In (c) and (d), x1 and x2 areencoded with sinusoidal signals with a different frequencies. Note that although different samplingrates are employed for (c) and (d), the same two values are repeated across the samples. Hence,sampling more than twice is redundant.
Figure 2: Stable rank of the Gaussian embedderagainst the standard deviation for different numberof samples. The dash line is the theoretical stablerank o 12 πσthe stable rank of the Gaussian embedding ma-trix and the embedded distance between coor-dinates can be obtained analytically as shownbelow.
Figure 3: Quantitative comparison of (a) the stable rank and (b) the distance preservation of differentembedders and random Fourier features. As expected, the stable rank of the impulse embedder strictlyincreases with the number of sampled points, causing poor distance preservation. The stable rankof the sine embedder is upper-bounded at 2. Note that as predicted in theory, the stable ranks ofthe square embedder and the sine embedder almost overlap. However, if the sample numbers areextremely high (not shown in the figure), their stable ranks begin to deviate. Similarly, the squareembedder demonstrates perfect distance preservation, and the sine embedder is a close competitor. Incontrast, the Gaussian embedder and the RFF showcase mid-range upper bounds for the stable rankand adequate distance preservation, advocating a much better trade-off between memorization andgeneralization.
Figure 4: Stability of the performance at different embedding dimensions when encoding a 1-Dsignal. Shaded areas correspond to two standard deviations across 10 experiments. As illustrated,the Gaussian embedder demonstrates much stable performance, especially at lower embeddingdimensions.
Figure 5: Performance and stable ranks of dif-ferent embedders against the number of sampledpoints.
Figure 6: The stable rank (left column) and dis-tance preservation (right column) of the Gaussianembedder and RFF across different standard de-viations.
Figure 7: Performance of the Gaussian embedder against the standard deviation over different numberof input samples.
Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of reconstructing 1-D signals using the Gaussian embedder acrossdifferent standard deviations. A too small σ demonstrates poor generalization, a too high σ givesover-smooth generalization, while a mid-range σ yields better results.
Figure 9: Qualitative results of reconstructing 2-Dsignals using the Gaussian embedder across dif-ferent standard deviations (best viewed in zoom).
