Figure 1: An overview of the ALANS learner. For an RPM instance, the neural visual perceptionmodule produces the belief states for all panels: an object CNN extracts object attribute distribu-tions for each image region, and a belief inference engine marginalizes them out to obtain panelattribute distributions. For each panel attribute, the algebraic abstract reasoning module transformsthe belief states into matrix-based algebraic representation and induces hidden operators by solvinginner optimizations. The answer representation is obtained by executing the induced operators, andthe choice most similar to the prediction is selected as the solution. An example of the underlyingdiscrete algebra and its correspondence is also shown on the right.
Figure 2: Isomorphism between the ab-stract algebra and the matrix-based rep-resentation. Operator induction is nowreduced to solving for a matrix.
Figure 3: Examples of RPM instances With the missing entries filled by solutions generated by theALANS learner. Ground-truth relations are also listed. Note the generated results do not look exactlylike the correct choices due to random rotations during rendering, but are semantically correct.
Figure S1:	A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the systematicity split. Note thatin the training example, the arithmetic relation (in number) is addition and the shifting is always aleft shift (in type, size, and color). In the test example, the shifting becomes a right shift (in type),the size progression has a step of 2, and the color arithmetic becomes subtraction.
Figure S2:	A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the productivity split. Note thatin the training example, the constant rule is applied to number, type, and size, while the progressionrule is applied on color. In the testing example, the arithmetic rule is applied on all attributes.
Figure S3:	A training example (left) and a test example (right) in the localism split. Note that in thetraining example, the arithmetic rule is on all attributes. In the test example, the progression rule isapplied on number and the constant rule on all other attributes.
