Figure 1: MNIST Case 2: Odd and even adjacent columnsshow original and privatized versions respectively. For mostimages, numbers are still in the same category (utility at-tribute: ≥ 5 or < 5) while being switched from odd to even(private attribute). Some digits change from odd to even butalso switch from ≥ 5 to < 5, and some remain unchanged.
Figure 2: UAE-PUPET architecture. This architecture sup-ports both dynamic and constant setting. After the comple-tion of training, we detach the discriminator, and use thegenerator to generate private data.
Figure 3: MNIST Case 1: Confusion matrix before and after privacy mechanisma pre-defined λP value. The generator is only relevant to the training of the (au , ap) pair, and issubsequently discarded. (6) The sixth model pair, which is only used when the UAE is trained in thejoint setting, consists of the exact (au, ap) pair that results from the joint training.
Figure 4: MNIST Case 1: (4a) Odd and even adjacent columns show original and privatized ver-sions respectively (generated by joint training). Private feature refers to digit identity and utilityattribute refers to whether a number contains a circle or not. It is interesting to see that some pri-vatized data looks like a combination of more than one digits masked together, making it harder toinfer the digit identity. (4b) shows the robustness of joint training against multiple adversaries and aperformance comparison of the two settings.
Figure 5: MNIST Case 2: (5a) shows the confusion matrix prior to distortion and (5b) showsconfusion matrix post distortion. (5c) shows upper bound performance of two settings.
Figure 6: (6a) Experiment results for UCI adult, (6b) Experiment results for US Census Demo-graphic DataUCI Adult: In this experiment, we set our private feature as gender, and utility feature as income.
Figure 7: Fashion MNIST: Figure 7a obtained from dynamic setting with hyperparameter λP = 60,where clothing identity is the private feature, while “upper body clothing” and “miscellaneous” arethe two classes of the utility feature. Figure 7b shows the best achievable points for individual andjoint training under different adversaries.
