Figure 1: The overall pipeline of LDDMM-Face, which consists of a backbone model and twofunctional layers: a momentum estimator and a deformation layer consisting of N flows. In eachflow of the deformation layer, the initial curve is shown in the same color as that in the mean face,and the deformed curve is shown in black connected diamonds. The fine blue lines connectingeach initial landmark and the corresponding deformed landmark denote the trajectory of the initiallandmarks. Green arrows show the predicted momenta at each time step along the trajectory.
Figure 2: Demonstration of flexible and consistent face alignment for a right cheek (A), and cross-annotation face alignment (sparse-to-dense) results on WFLW and HELEN (B). In A, red circlesand blue diamonds respectively represent the initial and true facial landmarks used in training.
Figure 4: Mean faces of full landmarks, 50% landmarksand 33% landmarks for HELEN .
Figure 3: Mean faces of full land-marks and 50% landmarks for 300W andCOFW-68.
Figure 5: Mean faces of full landmarks and 50% landmarks for WFLW.
Figure 6: Qualitative results of sparsely-supervised LDDMM-Face on the 300W full set (trainedwith 50% landmarks, tested with full landmarks). Green landmarks are the ones involved in thetraining annotation scheme. Red landmarks are extra ones predicted by LDDMM-Face.
Figure 7: Qualitative results of sparsely-supervised LDDMM-Face on the HELEN test set (trainedwith 50% landmarks, tested with full landmarks). Green landmarks are the ones involved in thetraining annotation scheme. Red landmarks are extra ones predicted by LDDMM-Face.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of sparsely-supervised LDDMM-Face on the HELEN test set (trainedwith 33% landmarks, tested with full landmarks). Green landmarks are the ones involved in thetraining annotation scheme. Red landmarks are extra ones predicted by LDDMM-Face.
Figure 9: Qualitative results of sparsely-supervised LDDMM-Face on WFLW with six differentcategories of challenging cases (trained with 50% landmarks, tested with full landmarks). Greenlandmarks are the ones involved in the training annotation scheme. Red landmarks are extra onespredicted by LDDMM-Face.
Figure 10: Qualitative cross-annotation&cross-dataset comparison results between HRNet andLDDMM-Face on the HELEN test set (trained on 300W, tested on HELEN).
Figure 11: Qualitative cross-annotation&cross-dataset comparison results between HRNet andLDDMM-Face on the 300W full set (trained on HELEN, tested on 300W).
Figure 12: Qualitative cross-annotation&cross-dataset comparison results between HRNet andLDDMM-Face on the WFLW test set (trained on 300W, tested on WFLW).
Figure 13: Qualitative cross-annotation&cross-dataset comparison results between HRNet andLDDMM-Face on the 300W full set (trained on WFLW, tested on 300W).
