Figure 1: Standard architecture of a shallow ESN.
Figure 2: Mass accretion rate as a function of time for chaotic regime of model 29 per Vorobyovet al. (2017)2.2	OWA-ESNLiu et al. (2018) introduced a parallel series methodology to mitigate some of the statistical chal-lenges of the shallow ESN. The parallel ESN effectively generates L independent input Wi andreservoir Wr matrices. The time series is trained and validated on each reservoir to form L outputmatrices Wo each of which is used to output a unique signal. Finally, the model’s final output signalby(t) is taken as the mean of all L realizations:b⑴=1 X y(j)(t).	⑸jIn our extension, we propose to take a weighted average approach that favors better performingoutputs. The OWA-ESN assumes that the final output signal is a linear combination of all signalsfrom all L reservoirsb(t; β) = Eej y(j)(t).	(6)jfor a set of optimal weights βj that minimizes the error of the final output. We treat this as anoptimization problem of the formmin	∣lχF(t) - y(t;向「β^	11	11	⑺subject to Pj βj = 1
Figure 3: The model’s standardized fluctuating component (top) and standardized deterministiccomponent (bottom). The time series demonstrates the respective training (grey), validation (red)and free running (blue) segments.
Figure 4: The OWA-ESN optimized output signal along with the best individual output. The solidblue line is representative of the free running segment of data used in the optimization, whereas thedotted dashed line is the remaining segment t > T that is out of sample. OWA-ESN outputs forthe fluctuating and deterministic components (top left & right) respectively and the final OWA-*	j	*ESN output (bottom left panel) is found by summing the components M(t) ∙ σ-1 with Md(t) ∙σ-1. Furthermore, in the bottom right panel, we compare the OWA-ESN output when the data is* «decomposed into Md(t) and M(t) (red line) with the OWA output when we difference the datadirectly (green line).
Figure 5: The time evolving MSE for the forecast run outside the free run segment implementing theOWA-ESN under three scenarios. Each scenario varies the fluctuating component,s input scaling.
Figure 6: The RMSE demonstrated as a function of the number of reservoirs in the series over thefree running segment used in the optimization. The right panels demonstrate the same respectiveRMSE for the individual fluctuating (top) and deterministic (bottom) components.
Figure 7: Mass accretion rate from VorobyoV et al. (2017) as a function of time for models 26-32.
Figure 8: The optimized free running signal (red) for model 26 overlaid with the free running seg-ments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom) final.
Figure 9: The optimized free running signal (red) for model 27 overlaid with the free running seg-ments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom) final.
Figure 10: The optimized free running signal (red) for model 28 overlaid with the free runningsegments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom).
Figure 11: The optimized free running signal (red) for model 29 overlaid with the free runningsegments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom).
Figure 12: The optimized free running running signal (red) for model 30 overlaid with the testingsegments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom) final.
Figure 13: The optimized free running running signal (red) for model 31 overlaid with the testingsegments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom) final.
Figure 14: The optimized free running running signal (red) for model 32 overlaid with the testingsegments (blue) of the (a) standardized fluctuating, (b) standardized deterministic and (bottom) final.
