Figure 1: From left to right, a line, disk, and ball embedded in 3D space.
Figure 2: Points sampled from a 0 mean, 2D Gaussian with covariance ( x0 01 ) where x = 1, 3, 75.
Figure 3: Left: 2D zero-mean Gaussian with covariance (Q18 0ι8). We rotate X by 120° and 240°,respectively. Right: Points after applying PCA reorientation.
Figure 4: Left: Scores of points sampled from a 10-dimensional Gaussian with identity covarianceand common mean vector ranging from 0 to 20. Center: Scores for the scalar covariance test fora 5-dimensional Gaussian with a common mean vector M = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3]. Right: Scores for theMaximum Variance test for 10-dimensional, zero-mean Gaussians.
Figure 5: Left and center: Scores for the two Dimensions Used tests. Right: Scores for the “skew-ered meatball” test in 3 dimensions.
Figure 6: The 5 scores for each of the 12 layers of GPT-2 and GPT8Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Figure 7: The 5 scores for the 12 layers of BERT, and the 6 layers of DistilBERTOur findings using IsoScore challenge and extend upon the literature in the following ways. Con-textualized embedding models (i) utilize even fewer dimensions than previously thought; (ii) do notutilize fewer dimensions in deeper layers; and (iii) do not necessarily occupy a “narrow cone” inspace.
Figure 7: The 5 scores for the 12 layers of BERT, and the 6 layers of DistilBERTOur findings using IsoScore challenge and extend upon the literature in the following ways. Con-textualized embedding models (i) utilize even fewer dimensions than previously thought; (ii) do notutilize fewer dimensions in deeper layers; and (iii) do not necessarily occupy a “narrow cone” inspace.
Figure 8: 2D rendering of a line in 3D space intersecting noisy sphere.
Figure 9: Points sampled from a Uniform distribution, Poisson distribution, Student-T distributionand ChiSquare distribution respectivelyE	Geometry of IsotropyEach of the distributions illustrated in Figure 9 has a covariance matrix proportional to the identityand is therefore maximally isotropic. Namely, the variance is distributed equally in all directions.
