Figure 1: Visualization of surrogate optimization of equation 6 for 2-D cost (F (π)) along the preferencevector w~k. All the members in set Ck map to the line along the preference vector w~k in the objective space.
Figure 2: Visualization of the dominant solutions for different problem instances. It can be seen thatour network (PA-2 and PA-3) generates significantly better objective values0	100	200	300f1(d) 500 City MOTSP with 2-objective for CPcities and each city is represented by t dimensional features. These features are drawn uniformly atrandom from [0, 1]. Here, t = 4 for {2, 3}-objective TSP and t = 6 for 5-objective TSP. Two formsof objective functions are used, one with reward of L1-norm and the other one with L2-norm. For2-objective instances, we use L2-norm for both objective. In the case of {3, 5}-objective instances,we use L2-norm for f1 and L1-norm for the remaining. The objective with L2-norm is generatedusing equation 2. Similarly, the objective for L1-norm for b* ∈ R is:n-1fi(πIs) = IIbn(n)- b∏(i) Il+ X ∖∖b∏(ij)- b∏(j+i)∣∣ι	(16)j=1The results of PA-Net are compared with other methods on the basis of average run time and theaverage hypervolume (HV) of the solutions obtained across 25 instances. HV is a hybrid metric usedto evaluate Pareto fronts (Berube et al., 2009; Audet et al., 2020). It represents the volume coveredby the non-dominated set of solutions with respect to the a reference point.A higher HV representsa better quality of the Pareto front, both in terms of optimality and coverage of the objective space.
Figure 3: The above plot depicts the convergence of our method to Concave Pareto Front. Here redpoints are the results generated by our algorithm, green points are the solution from linear scalariza-tion method and blue points represent the set of possible solutions in the objective space.
Figure 4: PA-Net uses an augmented version of TSP-Net. The input to the network is a set of TSPgraphs Ω and a set of preference vectors W. The output is K TSP tours for each graph in Ω14Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Preference SelectionOne of the key features of PA-Net is its ability to generate solutions for different preferences in theobjective space. This is achieved by simultaneously training the network on a set of preferencesW. Since each w~k ∈ W is a unit vector, it must satisfy ||w~k||2 = 1. For training of 2-objectivenetwork, these preferences can be generated by sampling unit vectors from the unit circle for anglesin {0°, 90°}. For objectives more than two, selecting preferences is not so straight forward. In thiscase, the preference w~k ∈ Rp is generated using:(23)where aik is sampled from {0, 1} ∀i ∈ {1...p}. So using Eq-equation 23 preference vectors forhigher dimension optimization are generated. The network is trained on a fixed set of preferences.
Figure 5: Visualization of the dominant solutions for 3 and 2 objective MOTSP. It can be seen thatour network (PA-2 and PA-3) generates significantly better objective values(d) 500 City MOTSP with 2-objective18Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022Application for Coverage Planning: This experiment represents a setup where a robot has to visitmultiple locations in a building floor like a mall, airport etc (see Sec-4). The sequence of visitingthese locations is dependent on the path length and adherence to a pre-computed priority. Thevisualization of three tours generated by PA-Net for this scenario is shown in Fig-6(b)-(d). Thesquare section in the middle of the environment is given the highest priorities, and the rest of thedepots are assigned priorities randomly. In each plot of the tour shown in Fig-6, the first 100 depotsvisited are marked in red. It can be seen that Tour C visits the middle section first and has the leastpriority violation. On the other hand, emphasis in Tour A is to minimize the total tour length.
Figure 6: Visualization of different tours generated for the task of coverage planning. It can be seenthat Tour A has the least tour length, which comes at a cost of high priority violation. Tour C hasthe smallest priority violation. Tour B is an intermediate tour between the other two tours.
