Figure 1: A “patch” comprises zero or more proteins of two types and concentration distributions of14 types of lipids . Facilitating target multiscale simulations requires determining similarity amongpatches, even though there exists no well-formulated or widely-accepted notion of similarity.
Figure 2: Our framework imposes inductive biases using biology-informed intuitions to organizeneighborhoods of data points into a “multiscale hierarchy” that represent different conditions (blue,orange, and green). The “out-of-order” points (green in the orange cloud and orange in the greencloud) represent contradictions in the intuitions that are resolved by the metric.
Figure 3: We evaluate our similarity metrics using three criteria: (left) high ability to separatedifferent classes of data, using AUC. (middle) low overlap between the distances among data pointsand those among transformations. (right) low residual error (MARE) between the distances capturedby the metric and those given by the feature space (within the chosen proportionality factor).
Figure 4: We evaluated over 100 models using three quantitative criteria and the dimension of themetric space. Each model is shown as a curve along the four axes of this parallel coordinates plottwo-protein patch that is similar to (a); dz(a, b) = 0.262. (c) is a two-protein patch that is dissimilarto (a); dz(a, c) = 4.052. (d) is a ten-protein patch that is dissimilar to (a); dz(a, d) = 7.502. Patchvisualizations (rows) use the same layout as Figure 1; colormap is same for each lipid (column).
Figure 6: Our metric (dz) captures the differences in mean concentration vectors, μ(x), for bothPre-campaign and campaign datasets. For the latter, the simulation generates many new and previouslyunseen configurations, leading to a wider exploration in our metric space, resulting in a larger rangeof dz. Yet, the metric performs well on more than 78% of the data (left of vertical line).
Figure 7: Despite trained agnostic to spatiotemporal locations of patches, our model captures inher-ent relationships with respect to both space and time. (left) As expected, patches with little to nooverlap (>15 nm apart) show no correlation with our metric. (middle and right) Our metric capturesthe high similarity existent at small temporal neighbhoroods and also hints at the decorrelation timein the simulation, after which, patches are considered equally dissimilar in statistical mechanics.
Figure 8: Spatial kernels for creating radial profiles. From left to right, kernels for center radialprofile, γ(18,18) and the four corner profiles, γ(0,0), γ(36,0), γ(0,36), and γ(36,36) are shown.
Figure 9: Mean (black) and standard deviation (color) of radial profiles for patches in the trainingdataset. The profiles are computed after the standardization of channels.
Figure 10: Accuracy, precision, and recall for our selected metric (left) with respect to the patchtype and increasing neighborhoods in the metric space. We use the area under the precision-recallcurve (right) to evaluate the metric.
Figure 11: The distributional shifts observed between the pre-campaign data (used for training)and the campaign data (used for inference) highlights the need for generalizability of the similaritymetric. The shifts become more drastic as the campaign simulation progresses in time.
