Figure 1: SDOT matched GAN training mechanism. a,b in the noise space are mapped to A and B in the imagespace, respectively.
Figure 2:	Comparison of MRE and L1 distance in 1D and 2D toy data, and 256D real face data.
Figure 3:	Laguerre cell partition. Cells are colored per their area from small (blue) to large (red).
Figure 4: Images generated by GAN-0GP (SDOT-EGD). Fist row shows images generated on theCelebA-HQ dataset, and the second row show images generated on the COVOC dataset.
Figure 5: An illustration of the relationship between the MREs and the quality of SDOT maps. Thesource distribution is a continuous uniform distribution in [0, 1] × [0, 1], shown in a) and b), and thediscrete target distribution has 5 points , shown in c), with each point having the probability of 0.2.
Figure 6:	The Kolmogorov distance for different methods.
Figure 7:	The error bar plot for a) 1D data and b) 2D data. The caps mark the standard deviations.
Figure 8: Laguerre cell decomposition for a 40×40 grid of 1600 data points. Each data pointhas probability of 1/1600. Cells are colored per their area from small (blue) to large (red). Celldecomposition from our method SDOT-EGD look more similar to a regular grid and is more uniformcompared to other methods. MC-Adam and ASGD have some cells that are obviously large. Thevanilla-EGD has small cells in the center and large cells in the corners. The 2-layer ASGD high cellarea variance and many cells are not square. The Vanilla-EGD and the ASGD have the number ofcells that are smaller than 1600, indicating that some target points do not have area in the noise spacethat are mapped to them. MRE est and L1 est are estimated MRE and L1 distance computed accordingto our theoretical bounds. The MRE est corresponds very well with the quality of the Laguerre celldecomposition. SDOT-EGD has much lower MRE est and L1 est, suggesting it is better than othermethods.
Figure 9: Comparison of MRE and the L1 distance for 256D toy data.
Figure 10:	Comparison of MRE and L1 distance in 1D and 2D toy data, and 256D real face data interms of running time.
Figure 11:	Comparison of MRE and L1 distance in 256D toy data, and 256D real face data in terms ofrunning time.
Figure 12: a) and b) show the performance of SDOT-EGD with e* fixed to 0.2, and various confidencevalues. SDOT-EGD can always converge to 0.2 under different confidence values. When the confi-dence is higher, SDOT-EGD requires a higher number of iterations. c) and d) show the performanceof SDOT-EGD with the confidence fixed to 0.9, and various e*. SDOT-EGD can always achievea preset precision e* ranging from 0.1 to 0.9. The smaller e*, the higher the number of iterationsrequired. As SDOT-EGD can always converge under different parameter settings, SDOT-EGD isnot sensitive to parameter selection. In all the other experiments, we simply set e* to 0.2 and theconfidence 1 - δ to 0.9.
Figure 13: Images randomly generated by a) WGAN-GP and b) WGAN-GP (SDOT-EGD). WGAN-GP generates several faces with bad quality, whereas WGAN-GP (SDOT-EGD) generates better facescompared to WGAN-GP.
Figure 14: Images randomly generated by a) GAN-0GP and b) GAN-0GP (SDOT-EGD). GAN-0GP(SDOT-EGD) generates much better faces than GAN-0GP, with every face having good quality.
Figure 15: Face interpolation by GAN-0GP (SDOT-EGD). Transitions between faces appear good.
Figure 16: A simple experiment showing mode collapse happens in a GAN with SDOT if there is animage, the first image in a), that does not have any area in the noise space that maps to it in SDOT. Inb), there is no generated image that resembles the first image in a). Note that due to a small numberof training samples, 8 samples in a), a GAN is expected to be overfitting.
Figure 17: Images randomly generated by a) WGAN-GP and b) WGAN-GP (SDOT-EGD). Theimages generated by both methods appear comparable.
Figure 18: Images randomly generated by a) GAN-0GP and b) GAN-0GP (SDOT-EGD). GAN-0GPgenerates several images with bad quality (row 2 column 3, and row 3 column 3 in a)). GAN-0GP(SDOT-EGD) generates much better images compared to GAN-0GP.
