Figure 1: Running means and variances of multiple BN branches on 8 randomly sampled channelsin a VGG-16's Conv2」and conv3Λ layer. The results show that different 'p bounded adversarialperturbations induce different normalization statistics, which may arise in different domains (Seerunning statistics results at more layers for more models in Appendix E.8).
Figure 2: The training and inference procedures of GBN. During training, samples from differentdomains (denoted by different colors) are fed into corresponding BN branches to update the runningstatistics. During inference, given mini-batch data (from unknown domain), the gated sub-networkfirst predicts the domain of input x (the confidences are denoted by lines in different thickness), andthen jointly normalizes it using multiple BN branches.
Figure 3: We use the BN block at layer conv3Λ of a VGG-16 trained using AVG, and the GBNblock at layer conv3Λ of a VGG-16. We visualize the features before and after BN/GBN blocks.
Figure 4: Gated sub-network prediction accuracy in different scenarios (ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10):(a) shows the results of fooling gated sub-networks in all GBN layers (specially designed for at-tacking GBN); (b) shows the results of attacking whole network (common white-box attacks for themodel). Adding GBN to different layers (VGG-16 on CIFAR-10): (c) shows the results of addingGBN to single layers; (d) shows the results of adding GBN to top-m layers.
Figure 5: (a): the standard BN structure. (b): the structure with 4 BN branches, which are fed withdifferent mini-batches from different Dk to estimate the normalization statistics.
Figure 6: The architecture of the gated sub-network used in this paper.
Figure 7: Model sensitivity to additive noise aligned with different Fourier basis vectors on CIFAR-10. From left to right: vanilla, '1-trained, '2-trained, and '∞-trained models. The numbers indicatethe model error rates.
Figure 8: Running statistics (running mean and running variance) of each BN in the multiple BNbranches at different layers of a VGG-16 model on CIFAR-10.
Figure 9: Running statistics (running mean and running variance) of each BN in the multiple BNbranches at different layers of a WideReSNet-28R0 model on CIFAR-10.
