Figure 1: Overall network structure. CAM and FRM are the main components of the network. CAMinjects contextual information into FPN, and FRM filters FPN conflicting information.
Figure 2: The Structure of CAM: The feature is processed by the dilated convolution with rates of1, 3, and 5 respectively. And the context information is obtained by fusing the features of differentreceptive fields.
Figure 3:	Ways of fusion.
Figure 4:	The proposed FRM: (a) The framework of FRM. (b) The structure represented by the solidline in (a)As can be seen from Figure 4, FRM is mainly composed of two parallel branches, namely channelpurification module and space purification module. They are used to generate adaptive weights in thedimension of space and channel, which can guide features to learn in a more critical direction. Thestructure of channel purification module is shown in Figure 4(b). To obtain channel attention map,the input feature map is compressed in the dimension of space to aggregate the spatial informationthat can represent the global features of images. Adaptive average pooling and adaptive maximumpooling are combined to obtain more refined global features of images. Xm is defined as the input5Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022of the mth (m={1, 2, 3}) layer of FRM. X(n, m) is defined as the result of resizing from the nthlayer to the mth layer. Xkm,x,y are defined as the value of the mth feature map on the kth channel atthe position (x,y). So, the output of the upper branch is:KmU = am ∙ xX1,m) + bm ∙ xX2,m) + bm∙ xX3,m)	(i)x,y	x,y	x,y	x,yIn the above formula, Kxm,y represents the output vector of the mth layer at the position (x,y). a, band c are the channel adaptive weights, the size of which is 1×1×1. a,b, and c are defined as:[am,bm,cm] =σ[AP(F)+MP(F)]	(2)F is the feature generated by concatenation operation just as show in Figure 4. σ represents the
Figure 5: Visualization results of feature maps. F3 is the input feature map of FPN(Lin et al., 2017),L3 is the output feature map of FPN(Lin et al., 2017), and P3 is the output feature of FRM whichhas less conflicting information.
Figure 6: Examples of data enhancement. The red box denotes the original target, and the green boxrepresents the enhanced target.
