Figure 1 : Holistic diagram of our burst image processing approach. Our network BIPNet takes as input aRAW image burst and generates a high-quality RGB image. BIPNet has three key stages. (1) Edge boostingfeature alignment to remove noise, and inter-frame spatial and color misalignment. (2) Pseudo-burst featurefusion mechanism to enable inter-frame communication and feature consolidation. (3) Adaptive group upsam-pling to progressively increase spatial resolution while merging multi-frame information. While BIPNet isgeneralizable to other restoration tasks, here we show super-resolution application.
Figure 2: Edge boosting feature alignment (EBFA) module aligns all other images in the input burst to thebase frame. Feature processing module (FPM) is added in EBFA to denoise input frames to facilitate the easyalignment. represents element-wise multiplication.
Figure 3 : (a) Pseudo-burst is generated by exchanging information across frames such that each featuretensor in the pseudo-burst contains complimentary properties of all frames. Pseudo bursts are processed with(shared) UNet to extract multi-scale features. (b) AGU module handles pseudo-bursts features in groups andprogressively performs upscaling. (c) Schematic of dense-attention based upsampler.
Figure 4: Visual results for ×4 burst SR on SyntheticBurst dataset (Bhat et al., 2021a). Compared to otherapproaches, our BIPNet yields images that are more vivid and visually closer to the ground-truth.
Figure 5: Comparisons for ×4 burst super-resolution on SyntheticBurst and BurstSR datasets (Bhat et al.,2021a). Our BIPNet produces more sharper and clean results than other competing approaches. Many moreexamples are provided in Appendix C.
Figure 6: Results for ×8 burst SR on SyntheticBurstdataset (Bhat et al., 2021a). (a) 1st burst frame. (b)Our BIPNet. (c) Ground truth. Our method effectivelyrecovers image details in extremely challenging cases.
Figure 7: Burst low-light image enhancement on Sonysubset (Chen et al., 2018). (a) Karadeniz et al. (2020). (b)BIPNet (Ours). (c) Ground truth. Our BIPNet better pre-serves color and structural detail in the enhanced images.
