Figure 1: Typical examples of control and drug images (M14 cellline). On the left, an early time point of the control (cells have notgrown yet) is shown against a strong drug effect (fragmented ordead cells). On the right, the end time points for the control andan ineffective drug are depicted. In the middle, an example ofintermediate growth of a control sample versus another cytotoxicdrug is given. Note the similarity between drugs and controls.
Figure 2: Graphical overview of models. a. A weakly-supervised deep classifier with a categoricalcross-entropy discrimination loss (drug vs control). b. A convolutional autoencoder with a binarycross-entropy reconstruction loss. c. A regularized convolutional autoencoder: models a and b,sharing the CNN backbone, trained simultaneously. d. A self-supervised CNN backbone with amean-squared error difference loss (BYOL).
Figure 3: D(MTX, PTX), D(MTX, DMSO),D (PTX, DMSO) for M14 cell line. The fourmodel architectures are organized in rows (fromtop to down): the unsupervised, the self-supervised , the weakly-supervised, the regular-ized. In columns, the four different setups aregiven (from left to right): augmentations + multi-crops, augmentations + single crops, no augmen-tations + multi-crops, no augmentations + singlecrops.
Figure 4: Binary classification accuracy (drug vscontrol) for three picked cell lines: HT29, HCT15,ACHN. The four model architectures are orga-nized in rows (from top to down): the unsuper-vised, the self-supervised , the weakly-supervised,the regularized. In columns, the four different se-tups are given (from left to right): augmentations+ multi-crops, augmentations + single crops, noaugmentations + multi-crops, no augmentations +single crops.
Figure 5: Clustering analysis for three picked cell lines: SKMEL2, SW620, COLO205. Mean num-bers of identified clusters (A) and mean Silhouette scores (B) are shown with confidence intervals.
Figure 6: Random examples of reconstructed and original images for the unsupervised (a) and theregularized (b) models. Regularization did not harm the quality of reconstructions. The learningcapacity of the CNN backbone was sufficient to capture normal and altered morphology of the cells.
Figure 7: Clustering example of 20480 images (HCT15 cell line) with random cluster representa-tives. Each point is a 2D UMAP embedding of the learned image representations (self-supervisedmodel). Clusters found by HDBSCAN are highlighted in colors. The left cluster (blue) containsdrugs of no effect on HCT15. The right cluster (red) contains the drugs of the strongest effect.
