Figure 1: Overall proposed architecture, composed of the Abstraction Autoencoder (AbsAE) andthe Relational Learner (ReL).
Figure 2: Accuracy and accepted ratio of the AbsAE for different α thresholds and different amountsof supervision. The results are computed over the HWF, dSprites and Shapes3D datasets. τ is theamount of supervision, measured in number of samples.
Figure 3: Accuracy and accepted ratio of the ReL for different α thresholds and different relationaldepths. The results are computed over the HWF, dSprites and Shapes3D datasets.
Figure 4: Samples of relations learned by the ReL on different datasets (additional samples areavailable in Appendix B).
Figure 5: Disentanglement/reconstruction trade-off of the models on the considered datasets. Thedisentanglement metric (y-axis) is plotted against the reconstruction error (x-axis).
Figure 6: Samples generated from the HWF dataset, obtained by decoding the means of the 13gaussians that compose the prior p(z). In HWF there is only a generative factor, that is, the identityof the digit/math operator (13 total values).
Figure 7: Samples generated from the dSprites dataset, obtained by decoding the means of the 27gaussians that compose the prior p(z). The dSprites dataset is the combination of three generativefactors: shape (3 values), xφosition (3 values), yψosition (3 values).
Figure 8: Samples generated from the Shapes3D dataset, obtained by decoding the means of the 120gaussians that compose the priorp(z). The Shapes3D dataset is the combination of three generativefactors: object-hue (10 values), object-scale (3 values), objectshape (4 values). The remainingfactors are considered nuisances.
Figure 9: Examples of latent codes manipulation by the ReL on the HWF dataset. The sampleshave been obtained by feeding in input to the ReL the concatenation of the encoded inputs, andthen decoding the corresponding output (please note that all the math relations are to be intended asmodule 10).
Figure 10: Examples of latent codes manipulation by the ReL on the HWF dataset. Here we showtwo different variations of the ReL. On the left hand side, the ReL is modified to output the sign ofthe results. On the right hand side, the ReL is modified to output 2-digits results.
Figure 11: Examples of latent codes manipulation by the ReL on the dSprites dataset. The sampleshave been obtained by feeding in input to the ReL an encoded image, selecting a relation (repre-sented as a categorical variable), and decoding the corresponding output.
Figure 12: Examples of latent codes manipulation by the ReL on the Shapes3D dataset. The sam-ples have been obtained by feeding in input to the ReL an encoded image, selecting a relation(represented as a categorical variable), and decoding the corresponding output.
