Figure 1: (a) Training trajectory of the unforced Burgers equation used for the construction of theROM with DMD. The discrete-time snapshots in t ∈ [0, 5] constitute the training data fed to theDMD. The tracking performance of the RL-ROE will be evaluated for t ∈ [0,10] on trajectorieswith similar dynamical behavior as this one. (b) Zooming into t ∈ [0,1] reveals the fast decay of thepulse-shaped initial condition (14).
Figure 2: Accuracy of the RL-ROE for the unforced case. (a,b,c) L2 error of the RL-ROE and KF-ROE with respect to specific reference trajectories of the Burgers equation, initialized from (15a)using α = 0.5, 1, 2. The RL-ROE and KF-ROE are evaluated using 20 different initial estimatessampled from (15b). The curves and shaded area indicate the mean and standard deviation of theerror, respectively. (Appendix E shows the same data for t ∈ [0, 2].) (d,e,f) Phase space trajectoriesof the RL-ROE and KF-ROE predictions for 5 initial estimates, and the reference solution.
Figure 3: (a) Training trajectory of the forced Burgers equation used for the construction of theROM with DMD. The discrete-time snapshots in t ∈ [0, 5] constitute the training data fed to theDMD. The tracking performance of the RL-ROE will be evaluated for t ∈ [0,10] on trajectorieswith similar dynamical behavior as this one. (b) Zooming into t ∈ [0,1] reveals the fast decay of thepulse-shaped initial condition (14).
Figure 4: Accuracy of the RL-ROE for the forced case. (a,b,c) L2 error of the RL-ROE and KF-ROEwith respect to specific reference trajectories of the Burgers equation, initialized from (15a) usingα = 0.5, 1, 2. The RL-ROE and KF-ROE are evaluated using 20 different initial estimates sampledfrom (15b). The curves and the surrounding shade indicate the mean and standard deviation of theerror, respectively. (Appendix E shows the same data for t ∈ [0, 2].) (d,e,f) Phase space trajectoriesof the RL-ROE and KF-ROE predictions for 5 initial estimates, and the reference solution.
Figure 5: Accuracy of the ROM for the unforced case. (a,b,c) L2 error of the ROM prediction withrespect to a reference numerical solution of the Burgers equation, both initialized from (15a) usingα = 0.5, 1, 2. The case α = 1 corresponds to the solution trajectory whose snapshots in t ∈ [0, 5]were used to construct the ROM. (d,e,f) Phase space trajectories of the ROM prediction and thereference solution.
Figure 6: Accuracy of the ROM for the forced case. (a,b,c) L2 error of the ROM prediction withrespect to a reference numerical solution of the Burgers equation, both initialized from (15a) usingα = 0.5, 1, 2. The case α = 1 corresponds to the solution trajectory whose snapshots in t ∈ [0, 5]were used to construct the ROM. (d,e,f) Phase space trajectories of the ROM prediction and thereference solution.
Figure 7: Learning curves for the stochastic policy in the (a,b) unforced and (c,d) forced cases. Theline and shaded area show the mean and standard deviation of the results over 10 runs, each onesmoothed with a moving average of size 100 episodes.
Figure 8: Same as the first row of Figure 2, but shown for t ∈ [0, 2].
Figure 9: Same as the first row of Figure 4, but shown for t ∈ [0, 2].
Figure 10:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the unforced case. Same as Figure 2, butcomparing several RL-ROEs trained using different magnitudes R for the matrix R = RI in thereward function (7).
Figure 11:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the unforced case with moderate noise.
Figure 12:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the unforced case with large noise. Sameas Figure 2, but comparing several RL-ROEs trained using different magnitudes R for the matrixR = RI in the reward function (7), and with independent Gaussian observation noise of standarddeviation σ = 0.3 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 13:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the forced case. Same as Figure 4, butcomparing several RL-ROEs trained using different magnitudes R for the matrix R = RI in thereward function (7).
Figure 14:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the forced case with moderate noise.
Figure 15:	Effect of R on the accuracy of the RL-ROE for the forced case with large noise. Sameas Figure 4, but comparing several RL-ROEs trained using different magnitudes R for the matrixR = RI in the reward function (7), and with independent Gaussian observation noise of standarddeviation σ = 0.3 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 16:	Accuracy of the DNN estimator for the unforced case with noise. Same as Figure 2, butcomparing the RL-ROE with the DNN estimator, and with independent Gaussian observation noiseof standard deviation σ = 0.1 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 17:	Accuracy of the DNN estimator for the forced case with noise. Same as Figure 4, butcomparing the RL-ROE with the DNN estimator, and with independent Gaussian observation noiseof standard deviation σ = 0.1 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 18:	Accuracy of the ROM+DNN estimator for the unforced case with noise. Same as Fig-ure 2, but comparing the RL-ROE with the ROM+DNN estimator, and with independent Gaussianobservation noise of standard deviation σ = 0.1 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 19:	Accuracy of the ROM+DNN estimator for the forced case with noise. Same as Fig-ure 4, but comparing the RL-ROE with the ROM+DNN estimator, and with independent Gaussianobservation noise of standard deviation σ = 0.1 added to the measurements yk.
Figure 20:	Accuracy of the ROM+DNN estimator for the forced case. Same as Figure 4, but com-paring the RL-ROE with the ROM+DNN estimator.
