Figure 1: Illustration of the principle of optical pulse stacking. Only 3-stage pulse stacking wasplotted for simplicity.
Figure 2: Function plot of the (a) 1-stage OPS: pulse energy P1(τ1) w.r.t. delay line τ1. (b) 2-stageOPS: pulse energy P2(τ1, τ2) w.r.t. delay lines (τ1, τ2).
Figure 3: Illustration of the interaction between RL agent and OPS environment. Only 2-stage pulsestacking was plotted in OPS for simplicity.
Figure 4: Comparison of the differentgame modes.
Figure 5: Example code of the OPS environment.
Figure 6: Rendering examples of the state of (a) initial state for easy mode, (b) initial state formedium or hard mode, (c) global optimal target state in a 2-stage OPS environment. The initial stateof the easy mode has almost sacked some parts of pulses, which is more closer to the target state.
Figure 7:	Training curve for SAC, TD3, and PPO on 5-stage OPS environment for (a) easy mode, (b)medium mode, and (c) hard mode. The dashed region shows the area within the standard deviation.
Figure 8:	Evaluation of the stacked pulse power PN (normalized) of testing environment for (a) easymode, (b) medium mode, and (c) hard mode.
Figure 9: Comparison of the results on hard mode N -stage OPS environment with TD3 algorithms.
Figure 10: (a) Final return PN of different stage OPS on testing environment controlled with TD3 orSAC. (b) Convergence steps for the training of TD3 and SAC on different stage OPS environments.
Figure 11: Demonstration of the transfer performance of the trained policy on (a) hard mode trainingenvironment; (b) medium mode training environment; (c) easy mode training environment.
Figure 12: Configuration of optical pulse stacking (OPS) system. Only a 2-stage OPS system wasplotted for simplicity.
Figure 13: Demonstration of stacking two pulses with additional time delay. (a) shows the initialstate of the 2 pulses before stacking. (b)-(e) show the (chronological) procedure of the stacking 2pulses with imposing additional time delay. The former (latter) pulse was plotted with purple (red).
Figure 14: Real world optical pulse stacking system.
Figure 15:	4-stage OPS experiments. Training reward was plotted for (a) easy mode, (b) mediummode, and (c) hard mode. Evaluation of the stacked pulse power P4 (normalized) of testing envi-ronment was plotted for (d) easy mode, (e) medium mode, and (f) hard mode.
Figure 16:	6-stage OPS experiments. Training reward was plotted for (a) easy mode, (b) mediummode, and (c) hard mode. Evaluation of the stacked pulse power P6 (normalized) of testing envi-ronment was plotted for (d) easy mode, (e) medium mode, and (f) hard mode.
Figure 17: Demonstration of the controlling 5-stage OPS hard mode testing environment by TD3algorithm after training. (a): initial state of pulses; (b) pulse state after 10 control iterations; (c)pulse state after 20 control iterations; (d) pulse state after 30 control iterations; (e) pulse state after40 control iterations; (e) pulse state after 50 control iterations.
