Figure 1: The confidence of a raw image (left), its low-frequency component (middle) and high-frequency com-ponent (right) on Inc-v3 (Szegedy et al., 2016).
Figure 2: The visualization for the shallow layer (“activation 2”) feature maps of Inception-v3 (Szegedy et al., 2016) w.r.t the input (a) and its corresponding adversarial example crafted byour HIT.
Figure 3: The average accuracy of HFCand LFC obtained by different Gaussiankernel. We show the visualization and con-fidence for kernel length 17 in Fig. 1.
Figure 4: Three simple geometric patterns serve as proto-patterns.
Figure 5: The average attack success rates (%) of ten models W.r.t the strength of semi-random noiseNsr and random noise Nr (left), tile-schemes (middle) and densities (right). “blur” denotes usingGaussian kernel to smooth the image (constrained by maximum perturbation ε).
Figure 6: The attack success rates (%) of circle patches (left), square patches (middle) and rhom-buses patches (right) w.r.t maximum perturbation ε.
Figure 7: We compare the average responses of HFC with LFC for each feature map. “HFC domi-nant” means the average responds of HFC is higher than LFC, and “LFC dominant” is vice versa.
Figure 8: The average attack success rates (%) of different adversarial patches against NTs w.r.tweight factors.
Figure 9: Qualitative comparison for adversarial examples crafted by different methods. The maxi-mum perturbation ε is 16.
Figure 10: The results for attack Google Cloud Vision API.
Figure 11: We randomly selected four raw images from ImageNet dataset Russakovsky et al. (2015)to replace our adversarial patches, then test the attack performance by our HIT.
Figure 12: We show (a) our adversarial patch and (b) someimages which classified as shower curtain from ImageNetdataset. The bottom row is their HFC extracted by Eq. 1.
Figure 16: The average attack success rates (%) of differentadversarial patches against EAT (left) and FD (right) w.r.ttile-schemes.
Figure 13: We visualize our proto-patterns w.r.t densities. Here we take concentric circles as anexample.
Figure 14: We visualize our adversarial patches w.r.t tile-schemes.
Figure 15: The visualization for resultant adversarial examples w.r.t tile-schemes.
