Figure 1: Left: Current quantum hardware has much larger error rates (around 10-3) than classicalCPUs/GPUs. Right: Due to the errors, QNN models suffer from severe accuracy drops. Differentdevices have various error magnitudes, leading to distinct accuracy. These motivate RoQNN, ahardware-specific noise-aware QNN training approach to improve robustness and accuracy.
Figure 2: Quantum Neural Networks Architecture. QNN has multiple blocks, each contains anencoder to encode classical values to quantum domain; quantum layers with trainable weights; anda measurement layer that obtains a classical value from each qubit.
Figure 3: RoQNN Overview. (1) Post-measurement normalization matches the distribution of mea-surement results between noise-free simulation and real hardware deployment. (2) Based on realisticnoise models, noise-injection inserts quantum error gates to the training process to increase the clas-sification margin between classes. (3) Measurement outcomes are further quantized for denoising.
Figure 4: Post-measurement normalization reduces the distribution mismatch between noise-freesimulation and noisy results on real hardware, thus improving the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR).
Figure 5: Noise injection via error gate insertion. X, Y, Z are sampled Pauli error gates. R is theinjected readout error. Probabilities for gate insertion are obtained from real device noise models.
Figure 6: Left: Error maps before and after post-measurement quantization. Most errors can be cor-rected. Right: 5-level quantization buckets with a quadratic penalty loss to encourage measurementoutcomes to be near to the centroids.
Figure 7: Ablation on different noise injection methods. Left: Without quantization, gate insertionand measurement perturbation performs similar, both better than rotation angle perturbation. Right:With quantization, gate insertion is better as perturbation effect can be canceled by quantization.
Figure 8: RoQNN consistently achieves the highest accuracy, with on average 22% improvements.
Figure 9: Acc. contours ofquant. levels & noise factors.
Figure 10: Ablation of applying noise injection and quantization indi-vidually or jointly. Combining two together brings the best accuracy.
Figure 11: Feature visualization.
