Figure 1: The decision boundary relevant to wa-termark will be lost during extraction attack.
Figure 2: Pipeline of API protection framework. (a) Defender embeds a secret watermark into theprivate model behind the APL The model will classify watermark samples Xw 〜 Dw into a targetclass cT, e.g., predicting a golden retriever (cS) with a white patch into goldfish (cT). (b) Adversarysteals the model via query inputs sampled from legitimate dataset X 〜D. (c) The watermark willbe implicitly propagated to the stolen model and identified by the detection queries Xw 〜Dw.
Figure 3: Watermark location.
Figure 4: Transferability.
Figure 5: Model Pruning	Figure 6: Fine Pruning	Figure 7: QuantizationWe show the results of out-of-distribution watermarking and in-distribution watermarking in Tab 5and Tab. 3, respectively. For all image datasets, our proposed method significantly outperformstwo baseline methods on both MNIST and CIFAR-100 dataset. For example, in the in-distributionwatermarking, the Watermark Acc of stolen model is improved from 2.31% (baseline) and 21.05%(EWE) to 75.31% (Ours) on CIFAR-100 dataset. A similar improvement is found on CIFAR-100out-of-distribution watermarking, where the Watermark Acc is improved from 3.05% (baseline)and 28.62% (EWE) to 82.16% (Ours). To further explore the proposed framework on large-scaledatasets, we conduct experiment on the TinyImageNet dataset. The result shows that the proposedframework can work well on the TinyImageNet dataset, and the obtains a Watermark Acc with65.35% (OOD) and 60.18% (ID). In addition to evaluating watermark accuracy, we also adoptthe pairwise T-test proposed in Sec 3.2 to identify the watermark in the stolen models. We ran-domly select 击 of watermark samples and repeat the experiment 200 times. WDR is calculated byCounOHI), which We count the number of times that successfully reject the H hypothesis. The re-sults show that we obtain a WDR higher than 80% on all image datasets. In addition to vision data,we also extend our watermark method to natural language domain and do experiments on BERTmodel. The results show that the proposed method is extremely effective for two text datasets andobtains a Watermark Acc higher than 90% on two datasets for both OOD and ID watermarking.
