Table 1: DA results in classification accuracy on	Table 2: DA results in classification accu-digits datasets (higher is better).	racy on VisDA dataset (higher is better).
Table 3: DA results in classification accuracy on Office-Home dataset (higher is better).
Table 4: FID scores of generators that are trained with m-OT and m-POT on CIFAR10 and CelebAdatasets (smaller is better).
Table 5: Details of DA results on digit datasets. The table involves multiple settings including thenumber of mini-batches k, the learning rate for m-OT, m-UOT, and m-POT. For m-POT, the fractionof mass s is the number in the bracket next to the name. Entries of the table are classification accuracyon target domain.
Table 6: Details of DA results on Office-Home dataset. The table involves multiple settings includingthe number of mini-batches k, the learning rate for m-OT, m-UOT, and m-POT. For m-POT, thefraction of mass s is the number in the bracket next to the name. Entries of the table are classificationaccuracy on target domain.
Table 7: Details of DA results on VisDA dataset. The table involves multiple settings including thenumber of mini-batches k, the learning rate for m-OT, m-UOT, and m-POT. For m-POT, the fractionof mass s is the number in the bracket next to the name. Entries of the table are classification accuracyon target domain.
Table 8: Results of em-POT on digits datasets. The table involves multiple settings including thenumber of mini-batches k, the learning rate, the fraction of mass s, and the entropic regularizationcoefficient .
Table 9: Results of em-POT on Office-Home dataset. The table involves settings of the fraction ofmass s and the entropic regularization coefficient .
Table 10: Results of em-POT on VisDA dataset (s = 0.75, = 0.004).
Table 11: DA performance of on digits datasetsfor m-OT and m-UOT with one more sample in amini-batch (m + 1).
Table 12: DA performance of equivalentproblems on VisDA dataset for m-OTand m-UOT with one more sample in amini-batch (m + 1).
Table 13: DA performance of equivalent problems on Office-Home dataset for m-OT and m-UOTwith one more sample in a mini-batch (m + 1).
Table 14: FID scores (smaller is better) of m-OT with one more samples in a mini-batch (m + 1) onCIFAR10 and CelebA datasets.
Table 15: Number of iterations per second in the deep generative model experiment.
