Table 1: Performance of TsmoBN for generalization on CIFAR-10-C dataset. Each column representsan unseen client under leave-one-CorruptionType-out validation. Results with the standard deviationare shown in Appendix E.2.2.
Table 2: Performance of TsmoBN for generalizationon digit classification dataset. Each column representsan unseen client. We implement our TsmoBN solutionon five state-of-the-art FL algorithms.
Table 3: Results of adding our proposed TsmoBN tocurrent domain generalization methods on digital clas-sification dataset.
Table 4: Results of adding our proposed TsmoBN to current domain generalization methods onCIFAR-10-C dataset, which demonstrates that our solution is orthogonal to these methods.
Table A.1: Notations occurred in the paper.
Table E.2: Model architecture of the Digits-DG experiment. For convolutional layer (Conv2D), welist parameters with sequence of input and output dimension, kernal size, stride and padding. Formax pooling layer (MaxPool2D), we list kernal and stride. For fully connected layer (FC), we listinput and output dimension. For BatchNormalization layer (BN), we list the channel dimension.
Table E.3: Model architecture for CIFAR-10-C experiment. For convolutional layer (Conv2D), welist parameters with sequence of input and output dimension, kernal size, stride and padding. Formax pooling layer (MaxPool2D), we list kernal and stride. For fully connected layer (FC), we listinput and output dimension. For BatchNormalization layer (BN), we list the channel dimension.
Table E.4: Performance of TsmoBN under imbalanced data setting. We report results on medicalimage dataset with 3 training clients and 2 unseen clients. Each column represents an unseen client.
Table E.5: Performance of TsmoBN for unseen client generalization on digit classification dataset.
Table E.6: Performance of TsmoBN for unseen client generalization on CIFAR-10-C dataset. Eachcolumn represents an unseen client under leave-one-CorruptionType-out validation. We implementour approach on five state-of-the-art FL algorithms and report standard deviation (in bracket) formultiple runs.
Table E.7: Performance of TsmoBN for unseen client generalization on medical image dataset with3 training clients and 2 unseen clients. Each column represents an OOF client. We implement ourapproach on five state-of-the-art FL algorithms and report standard deviation (in bracket) for multipleruns.
Table E.8: Results of adding our proposed TsmoBN to current domain generalization methods ondigital classification dataset. We report standard deviation (in bracket) for multiple runs.
Table E.9: Results of adding our proposed TsmoBN to current domain generalization methods onCIFAR-10-C dataset, which demonstrates that our solution is orthogonal to these methods. We reportstandard deviation (in bracket) for multiple runs.
