Table 1: Summary of datasets.
Table 2: Comparison on detection of Solar bursts as rare events. GMBM performed best among allmodels. Even our heuristic method based on color contour detection is not far behind.
Table 3: Classification performance on fruits dataset when Huckleberry class is made as a rare class.
Table 4: Classification performance on Aeroplane-Sky dataset. Aeroplane is the rare event in thiscase.
Table 5: Events Generated by Guided MCMC for Sparse Bayesian Models in which top visual wordsare shown as background colors with their corresponding probability values. a) Events generated onsynthetic burst dataset, here we have shown b) Events generated on aeroplane-sky dataset, c) Eventsgenerated on fruit dataset.
Table 6: Events generated on synthetic Burst dataset by providing a) event-visual φ guidance to ourmodel which will generate b) event-visual words distribution. In the guidance part we have set index0 as Non-Burst event and index 1 as Burst-event. For Non-Burst event we have filled 1 in all indexesand for Burst event, we have filled 1 only in place of rare visual words indexes i.e red, yellow, andorange. Notice that the index 1 in guidance of event-visual φ and event-visual words distributioncorresponds to Burst event. Now using index 1 in image-event distribution can help to detect burstsevents in solar radio images.
Table 7: Events generated on aeroplane-sky dataset by providing a) event-visual φ guidance to ourmodel which will generate b) event-visual words distribution. In the guidance part we have set index0 as Sky event and index 1 as aeroplane-event. For sky-event we have filled 1 in non-rare visual wordindex i.e. sky blue color and for aeroplane event, we have filled 1 in all rare visual words indexes i.ewhite, black, and grey. Notice that the index 1 in guidance of event-visual φ and event-visual wordsdistribution corresponds to aeroplane event. Now using index 1 in image-event distribution can helpto identify aeroplane is present in images or not.
Table 8: Events generated on fruit dataset by providing a) event-visual φ guidance to our modelwhich will generate b) event-visual words distribution. In the guidance part we have set fruit cate-gory for each index. for example in index 0 we have set 1 to blue as rare visual word for huckleberryclass and rest we have filled 0 in all indexes of huckleberry class. Similarly for other fruits we didthe same procedure. Notice that the each index in guidance of event-visual φ and event-visual wordsdistribution corresponds to same fruit event. Now using image-event distribution we can identifywhich image belongs to a particular fruit class.
