Table 1: ReLU, leaky-ReLU, PReLU, tanh, sigmoid, ELU, maxout (nine features), swish:x.sigmoid(β x) and S-APL activations are compared in three different tasks. The performanceof S-APL in comparison to the best of the other activations. For the sake of brevity, D-A refers toData Augmentation. The values in the tables are error-rates and are reported in percentage.
Table 2: 100 images are randomly chosen from CIFAR-10 test set to generate adversarial examples.
Table 3: Similar to the black-box attack experiment, 100 images are randomly chosen from CIFAR-10 test set to generate adversarial examples. For each architecture, four different is used to FGSMattack. For each model, four different activation namely, ReLU, APL, Swish, and S-APL are tested.
Table 4: Similar to the FGSM attack experiment, 100 images are randomly chosen from CIFAR-10test set to generate adversarial examples. For each model, four different activation namely, ReLU,APL, Swish, and S-APL are tested. The settings of the networks and activations are thoroughlyexplained in the Appendix.
Table 5: Three classifications tasks are performed with five different numbers of hinges for S-APLactivation. The number of additional parameters due to the use of S-APL and training loss arecompared below. The MLP architecture consists of three layers each with 256, 64, and 32 units. ForCIFAR-10, Lenet5 is employed and for the IMDB comment dataset, a network with one bi-LSTMlayer followed by two MLPs with 32 and 16 units is used.
Table 6: Per-epoch training time is reported in seconds. The same number is calculated for Tanhand Maxout units (with six features). S-APL is faster than Maxout and is slightly slower than Tanhunit. All models are trained using NVIDIA TITAN V GPU with 12036MiB memory and 850MHz.
Table 7: The best activation among ReLU, leaky-ReLU, PReLU, tanh, sigmoid, ELU, maxout (ninefeatures), Swish: x.sigmoid(βx) is chosen by the minimum average of the error rate. Then thesignificance of the comparison between the best network and S-APL activated network is calculatedthrough a t-test. The p-vales for each comparison is provided below.
