Table 1: Performance of our method in the 5-way low-resolution single-domain task. “Normalized”and “Simple” mean that the normalized and simple classifiers are used, respectively. “All”, “BN &FC”, and “FC” mean the following: the entire network was updated; the BN and FC layer wereupdated; only the FC layers were updated. “w/o FT” refers to performance without fine-tuningusing novel classes. Values with the f mark refer to classification accuracy without fine-tuning,as validation accuracy was not increased by fine-tuning the network. The * mark means that theclassification accuracy for novel classes was not available because the loss value did not decrease inthe pretraining phase. The - mark means that we did not conduct an experiment because the networkdid not have BN layers.
Table 2: Performance of our method in the 5-way high-resolution single-domain task. “Normal-ized” and “Simple” mean that the normalized and simple classifiers were used, respectively. “All”,“BN & FC”, and “FC” mean the following: the entire network was updated; the BN and FC layerwere updated; only the FC layers were updated. “w/o FT” refers to performance without fine-tuningusing novel classes. Values with the f mark refer to classification accuracy without fine-tuning, asvalidation accuracy was not increased by fine-tuning the network. The * mark means that classifi-cation accuracy for novel classes was not available because the loss value did not decrease in thepretraining phase. The - mark means that we did not conduct an experiment because the networkdid not have BN layers.
Table 3: Performance of our method in the 5-way cross-domain task. “Normalized” and “Simple”mean that the normalized and simple classifiers were used, respectively. “All”, “BN & FC”, and“FC” mean the following: the entire network was updated; the BN and FC layer were updated; onlythe FC layers were updated. “w/o FT” refers to performance without fine-tuning using novel classes.
Table 4: Comparison between our method and conventional methods. We show several results fromdifferent networks in Section 3.5, and therefore in this table show the highest accuracy for each task.
