Table 1: Below we see the averaged % errors with 95% confidence intervals for the different methodson six real datasets. Boosted Trees and Random Forest (100 trees) are the complex models (CM),while a single decision tree and linear SVM are the simple models (SM). Best simple model resultsare indicated in bold. * indicates the simple model has approached the complex models performance.
Table 2: Below we observe the averaged accuracies (%) of simple models SM-3 (3 Res units), SM-5(5 Res units) and SM-7 (7 Res units) trained with various weighting methods and distillation. Thecomplex model achieved 84.5% accuracy. Statistically significant best results are indicated in bold.
Table 3: Dataset Characteristics, Where N denotes dataset Size and d is the dimensionality.
Table 4: 18 unit Complex Model with 15 ResNet units.
Table 5: Residual NetWork Model used as the complex model for CIFAR-10 experiments in Section4.2Simple Model IDs	Additional Resunits	ReL Size-SM-3	None	-≈15--SM-5	(ReSunit:1-x) × 1 (ReSunit:2-x) × 1	-≈13-SM-7	(ReSunit:1-x) × 2 (ReSunit:2-x) × 1 (ReSunit:3-x) × 1	≈ 1/2Table 6: Additional Resnet units in the Simple Models apart from the commonly shared ones. Thelast column shoWs the approximate size of the simple models relative to the complex neural netWorkmodel in the previous table.
Table 6: Additional Resnet units in the Simple Models apart from the commonly shared ones. Thelast column shoWs the approximate size of the simple models relative to the complex neural netWorkmodel in the previous table.
Table 7: Probes at various units and their accuracies on the training set 2 for the CIFAR-10 experiment.
Table 8: Below we see the averaged % errors with 95% confidence intervals for Distill-proxy 2(regression versions of trees and SVM for the simple models that fit soft probabilities from thecomplex models) on the six real datasets. The results reported using Distill-proxy 1 are in the mainpaper and are superior to these. Boosted Trees and Random Forest (100 trees) are the complex models(CM), while a single decision tree and linear SVM are the simple models (SM).
