Table 1: Model FCONV and top-k sampling.
Table 2: Model FCONV and beam search.			Dataset		ROUGE 2	LBASE	39.2	10.8	37.0AB	41.8	11.6	38.6PART	31.1	9.0	29.6PART. Augmented Science Daily with partitioned targets as follows:1.	For each source-target pair in Science Daily, we preserve the source body body and wedivide the target into three equal parts part-1, part-2 and part-3.
Table 3: Model STORY and top-k sampling.	Table 4: Model STORY and beam search.
Table 5: Model FCONV and RA measure.		Table 6: Model STORY and RA measure.	Dataset	RA	Dataset	RABASE	38.0	BASE	22.7AB	77.8	AB	64.1PART	77.1	PART	73.8We call this evaluation measure random access (RA). Note that RA is conceptually similar to theprompt ranking procedure in (Fan et al., 2018) in terms of calculating scores, but importantly it isdifferent in terms of the random access property that we require. We conjecture that random access isimportant to test summarization systems because the sources are orders of magnitude larger than thewriting prompts used for neural story generation. Below, we show quantitatively and qualitativelythat RA measures the contributions of the experiments AB and PART.
Table 7:	Comparison of model generations.
Table 8:	Model gets one of the authors ruud buijs correct, whereas mod-els trained solely on the SD dataset would generate completely irrelevantauthors, often from the university of exeter. Both generations mentionkey words such as scn, day night variations, triglycerides, and circadian,suggesting that the model has accurately identified the subject matter ofthe text. In highlighted portions, the beam search generation seems tomost accurately identify the topic, however incorrectly writes glucoselevels instead of fat levels. Top-k sampling is not as concise or accurate,but includes more key words and ideas (eg. the circadian clock, triglyc-erides, normal levels of fat).
Table 9:	Both generations seem to stay on topic. However, the sourceis insufficient to convery that the study is “giving rise to concerns aboutbeing possibly misused for the purpose of biological warfare .”, becausethis is not information that could be found in the scientific paper.
Table 10:	Both generations talk about friction but at many points do notfollow a logical thread.
Table 11:	Both generations focus on antiparasitic treatment. Beam searchis significantly more coherent.
