Table 1: Average final scores on modified Cartpole (MDP) with Ntarget = 50. The best non-oracleresults w.r.t. the mean are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. allthe baselines, and "•" indicates the baseline for which the improvements of AdaRL are statisticallysignificant (via Wilcoxon signed-rank test at 5% significance level). G and M denote the gravity andmass respectively, and “*in" and “*out" denote the interpolation and extrapolation, respectively.
Table 2: Average final scores on modified Cartpole (POMDP) with Ntarget = 50. The best non-oracleresults are marked in red. G, M, and N denote the gravity, mass, and noise respectively.
Table 3: Average final scores on modified Pong (POMDP) with Ntarget = 50. The best non-oracleare marked in red. O, C, S, and N denote the orientation, color, size, and noise factors, respectively.
Table A1: The settings of source and target domains for modified Cartpole experiments.
Table A2: Average final scores in modified Cartpole (POMDP) with Ntarget = 20. The bestnon-oracle results are marked in red. G, M, and N denote the gravity, mass, and noise respectively.
Table A3: Average final scores in modified Cartpole (POMDP) with Ntarget = 10000. The bestnon-oracle results are marked in red. G, M, and N denote the gravity, mass, and noise respectively.
Table A4: Average final scores in modified Cartpole (MDP) with Ntarget = 20. The best non-oracleresults are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all the baselines.
Table A5: Average final scores in modified Cartpole (MDP) with Ntarget = 10000. The best non-oracle results are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all thebaselines. G, M, and N denote the gravity, mass, and noise respectively.
Table A6: The settings of source and target domains for modified Pong experiments.
Table A7: The learned θks across different orientation angles with different Ntarget in modified Pong.
Table A8: The learned θko across different colors with different Ntarget in modified Pong. The boldcolumns represent the target domains.
Table A9: The settings of source and target domains for modified Pong experiments.
Table A10: Average final scores on modified Pong (POMDP) with Ntargets = 20. The best non-oracle results are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all thebaselines. O, C, S, and N denote the orientation, color, size, and noise factors, respectively.
Table A11: Average final scores on modified Pong (POMDP) with Ntargets = 10000. The bestnon-oracle results are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all thebaselines. O, C, S, and N denote the orientation, color, size, and noise factors, respectively.
Table A12: Results on modified Pong game with Ntargets = 50. The best non-oracle results aremarked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all the baselines. Rl and Rodenote the linear reward and nonlinear reward-changing cases, respectively.
Table A13: Average final scores on modified Pong (POMDP) with Ntarget = 10000. The bestnon-oracle results are marked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all thebaselines. Rl and Ro denote the linear and nonlinear reward changes, respectively.
Table A14: Results on modified Pong game with Ntargets = 50000. The best non-oracle results aremarked in red, while bold indicates a statistically significant result w.r.t. all the baselines. Rl and Rodenote the linear reward and nonlinear reward-changing cases, respectively.
Table A15: Results on MuJoCo benchmarks (Cheetah and Ant experiments with different targetvelocities, with 30 trials each) with Ntargets = 50, 000. The best results are marked in red.
Table A16: Experimental details on the model estimation part.
Table A17: Experimental details on the policy learning part.
