Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of pixel-noise removal on several datasets. We compare results in termsof mean Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR, in dB) over 5 runs. Note, PSNR is a logarithmic measure. Bestperforming method is indicated with underline, best performing unsupervised method is shown in bold. Diversitymethods allow to generate an arbitrary number of plausible denoised reconstructions given the single observation.
Table 2:	Ablation studies on BSD68 denoising with HDN. We find that performance usually improves with(a) increasing the number of latent layers, (b) increasing the number of residual blocks per latent layer, (c)incorporating gating blocks, batch norm, skip connections on bottom-up path and free-bits thus validating theimportance of each component and validating our careful design. PSNR results (in dB) are shown.
Table 3:	Quantitative striping artefacts removal. On the real-world microscopy data from Broaddus et al.
Table 4: Performance of HDN networks with “deactivated” latent layers. We show results for HDN setups(in terms of PSNR in dB) with different layers of the original HDN architecture “deactivated” (see main textand Appendix A.4 for more details). In line with our observations in Fig. 3, the HDN3_6 setup leads to the bestperformance on the data of BroaddUs et al. (2020), which We used here.
Table 5: Quantitative pixel-noise removal with HDN. For all conducted experiments, we compare resultsin terms of Structural Similarity (SSIM) and PSNR. The best performing method is indicated by being under-lined, best performing unsupervised method is shown in bold. For all but one dataset, our HierarchicalDivNoising is the new unsupervised SOTA method, even superseding the competing supervised baselines on4 of the used datasets.
Table 6: Comparison of HIERARCHICAL DIVNOISING MMSE estimate vs HIERARCHICALDivNoising pixel-wise median estimate. The numbers represent PSNR values. Both the MMSE estimateand median estimates are computed from 100 HDN denoised samples.
Table 7: Sampling times with HIERARCHICAL DIVNOISING. Average time (evaluated over all test images)needed to sample 1 denoised image and 100 denoised images from a trained HIERARCHICAL DIVNOISINGnetwork. The size of test images is also shown.
