Table 1: Quantitative results for Anomaly Transformer (Ours) in the five datasets. The P, R and F1represent the precision, recall and F1-score (as %) respectively. F1-score is the harmonic mean ofprecision and recall. For these three metrics, a higher value indicates a better performance.
Table 2: Ablation results (F1-score) in anomaly criterion, prior-association and optimization strat-egy. Recon, AssDis and Assoc mean the pure reconstruction performance, pure association dis-crepancy and our proposed association-based criterion respectively. Fix is to fix Learnable scaleparameter σ of prior-association as 1.0. Max and Minimax refer to the strategies for associationdiscrepancy in the maximization (Equation 4) and minimax (Equation 5) way respectively.
Table 3: Results of adjacent association weights for Abnormal and Normal time points respectively.
Table 4: Model performance under difference selection of model layers for association discrepancy.
Table 5: Model performance under different definitions of association discrepancy.
Table 6: Model performance under different definitions of prior-association. Our Anomaly Trans-former adopts the Gaussian kernel as the prior. Power-law refers to the power-law kernel.
Table 7: Ablation of criterion definition. We also include the state-of-the-art deep model THOC(Shen et al., 2020) for comparison. AssDis and Recon represent the pure association discrepancyand the pure reconstruction performance respectively. Ours refers to our proposed association-basedcriterion with the multiplication combination.
Table 8: Model performance under different choices of the number of layers L.
Table 9: Model performance under different choices of the number of hidden channels dmodel. Memmeans the averaged GPU memory cost. Time is the averaged running time of 100 iterations duringthe training process.
Table 10: Statistical results of anomaly score distribution on the validation set. We count the numberof time points with corresponding values in several intervals.
Table 11: Model performance. Choose by δ means that we fix δ as 0.1 for the SMD, MSL andSWaT datasets, 0.01 for the SMAP and PSM datasets. Choose by r means that we select r as 0.1%for SWaT, 0.5% for SMD and 1% for the other datasets.
Table 12: Additional quantitative results for Anomaly Transformer (Ours) in five real-world datasets.
Table 13: Details of benchmarks. AR represents the truth abnormal proportion of the whole dataset.
Table 14: Quantitative results in UCR Dataset. IF refers to the IsolationForest (2008). Ours is ourAnomaly Transformer. P, R and F1 represent the precison, recall and F1-score (%) respectively.
