Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Fully Online Meta-Learning Without Task
B oundaries
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
While deep networks can learn complex functions such as classifiers, detectors,
and trackers, many applications require models that continually adapt to changing
input distributions, changing tasks, and changing environmental conditions. Indeed,
this ability to continuously accrue knowledge and use past experience to learn new
tasks quickly in continual settings is one of the key properties of an intelligent
system. For complex and high-dimensional problems, simply updating the model
continually with standard learning algorithms such as gradient descent may result in
slow adaptation. Meta-learning can provide a powerful tool to accelerate adaptation
yet is conventionally studied in batch settings. In this paper, we study how meta-
learning can be applied to tackle online problems of this nature, simultaneously
adapting to changing tasks and input distributions and meta-training the model
in order to adapt more quickly in the future. Extending meta-learning into the
online setting presents its own challenges, and although several prior methods have
studied related problems, they generally require a discrete notion of tasks, with
known ground-truth task boundaries. Such methods typically adapt to each task
in sequence, resetting the model between tasks, rather than adapting continuously
across tasks. In many real-world settings, such discrete boundaries are unavailable,
and may not even exist. To address these settings, we propose a Fully Online Meta-
Learning (FOML) algorithm, which does not require any ground truth knowledge
about the task boundaries and stays fully online without resetting back to pre-
trained weights. Our experiments show that FOML was able to learn new tasks
faster than the state-of-the-art online learning methods on Rainbow-MNIST, and
CIFAR100 datasets.
1	Introduction
Flexibility and rapid adaptation are a hallmark of intelligence: humans can not only solve complex
problems, but they can also figure out how to solve them very rapidly, as compared to our current
machine learning algorithms. Such rapid adaptation is crucial for both humans and computers: for
humans, it is crucial for survival in changing natural environments, and it is also crucial for agents
that classify photographs on the Internet, interpret text, control autonomous vehicles, and generally
make accurate predictions with rapidly changing real-world data. While deep neural networks are
remarkably effective for learning and representing accurate models (He et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015), they are comparatively unimpressive
when it comes to adaptability, due to their computational and data requirements. Meta-learning
in principle mitigates this problem, by leveraging the generalization power of neural networks to
accelerate adaptation to new tasks (Finn et al., 2019; Li et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018; Nichol
& Schulman, 2018; Park & Oliva, 2019; Antoniou et al., 2018). However, standard meta-learning
algorithms operate in batch mode, making them poorly suited for continuously evolving environments.
More recently, online meta-learning methods have been proposed with the goal of enabling continual
adaptation (Finn et al., 2019; Jerfel et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2020; Nagabandi et al., 2018; Li &
Hospedales, 2020), where a constant stream of data from distinct tasks is used for both adaptation
and meta-training. In this scheme, meta-training is used to accelerate how quickly the network can
adapt to each new task it sees, and simultaneously use that data from each new task for meta-training.
This further accelerates how quickly each subsequent task can be acquired. However, current online
meta-learning methods fall short of the goal of creating an effective adaptation system for online data
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 1: Comparison of standard online meta-learning and FOML: In standard online meta-learning (e.g.,
FTML (Finn et al., 2019)), shown on the left, adaptation is performed on one task a time, and the algorithm
“resets” the adaptation process at task boundaries. For example, a MAML-based method would reset the current
parameters back to the meta-trained parameters. In our approach (right), knowledge of task boundaries is not
required, and the algorithm continually keeps track of online parameters φ and meta-parameters θ . The online
parameters are simply updated on the latest data, and the meta-parameters are updated to “pull” the online
parameters toward fast-adapting solutions via a MAML-style meta-update.
in several ways: (1) they typically require task boundaries in the data stream to be known, making
them ill-suited to settings where task boundaries are ill-defined and tasks change or evolve gradually,
a common tread in real-world; (2) as a result, they typically re-adapt from the meta-trained model
on each task, resulting in a very “discrete” mode of operation, where the model adapts to a task,
then resets, then adapts to a new one. These limitations restrict the applicability of current online
meta-learning methods to real-world settings. We argue that task boundary assumption is somewhat
artificial in online settings, where the stream of incoming data is cleanly partitioned into discrete
and well-separated tasks presented in sequence. In this paper, we instead develop a fully online
meta-learning approach, which does not assume knowledge of task boundaries and does not re-adapt
for every new task from the meta parameters.
Standard meta-learning methods consist of a meta-training phase, typically done with standard SGD,
and an “inner loop” adaptation phase, which computes task specific parameter φi for the task Ti from
a support set to make accurate predictions on a query set. For example, in model-agnostic meta-
learning (MAML), adaptation consists of taking a few gradient steps on the support set, starting from
the meta-trained parameter vector θ, leading to a set of post-adaptation parameters, and meta-training
optimizes the meta-trained parameters θ so that these gradient steps lead to good results. Previous
extensions of such approaches into the online setting typically observe one task at a time, adapt to
that task (i.e., compute post-adaptation parameters on it), and then reset φi back to the meta-trained
parameters θ at the beginning of the next task. Thus, the algorithm repeatedly adapts, resets at the
task boundary, adapts again, and repeats. This is illustrated in Figure 1 (left). However, in many
realistic settings, the task boundaries are not known, and instead the tasks shift gradually over time.
The discrete “resetting” procedure is a poor fit in such cases, and we would like to simply continue
adapting the weights over time without ever resetting back to the meta-trained parameters, but still
benefit from a concurrent meta-training process. For example, a meta-trained image-tagging model
on the Internet (e.g., tagging friends in photographs) might gradually adapt to changing patterns and
preferences of its users over time, where it would be unnatural to assume discrete shifts in what users
want to tag. Similarly, a traffic prediction system might adapt to changing traffic patterns, including
periodic changes due to seasons, and unexpected changes due to shifting economic conditions,
weather, and traffic accidents. In this spirit, our method does not require any knowledge on the task
boundaries as well as stays fully-online through out the learning.
The main contribution of our paper is FOML (fully online meta-learning), an online meta-learning
algorithm that continually updates its online parameters with each new datapoint or batch of datapoints,
while simultaneously performing meta-gradient updates on a separate set of meta-parameters using a
buffer of previously seen data. FOML does not require ground truth knowledge of task boundaries,
and does not reset the online parameters back to the meta-parameters between tasks, instead updating
the online parameters continually in a fully online fashion. We compare FOML empirically to strong
baselines and a state-of-the-art prior online meta-learning method, showing that FOML learns to
adapt more quickly, and achieves lower error rates, both on a simple sequential image classification
task from prior work and a more complex benchmark that we propose based on the CIFAR100 dataset,
with a sequence of 1200 tasks.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
2	Related Work
Online meta-learning brings together ideas from online learning, meta learning, and continual learning,
with the aim of adapting quickly to each new task while simultaneously learning how to adapt even
more quickly in the future. We discuss these three sets of approaches next.
Meta Learning: Meta learning methods try to learn the high-level context of the data, to behave
well on new tasks (Learning to learn). These methods involve learning a metric space (Koch et al.,
2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017), gradient based updates (Finn et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Park & Oliva, 2019; Nichol et al., 2018; Nichol & Schulman, 2018), or some
specific architecture designs (Santoro et al., 2016; Munkhdalai & Yu, 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2016).
In this work, we are mainly interested in gradient based meta learning methods for online learning.
MAML (Finn et al., 2017) and its variants (Nichol et al., 2018; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Li et al.,
2017; Park & Oliva, 2019; Antoniou et al., 2018) first meta train the models in such a way that the
meta parameters are close to the optimal task specific parameters (good initialization). This way,
adaptation becomes faster when fine tuning from the meta parameters. However, directly adapting
this approach into an online setting will require more relaxation on online learning assumptions, such
as access to task boundaries and resetting back and froth from meta parameters. Our method does not
require knowledge of task boundaries.
Online Learning: Online learning methods update their models based on the stream of data sequen-
tially. There are various works on online learning using linear models (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006),
non-linear models with kernels (Kivinen et al., 2004; Jin et al., 2010), and deep neural networks (Zhou
et al., 2012). Online learning algorithms often simply update the model on the new data, and do not
consider the past knowledge of the previously seen data to do this online update more efficiently.
However, the online meta learning framework, allow us to keep track of previously seen data and with
the “meta” knowledge we can update the online weights to the new data more faster and efficiently.
Continual Learning: A number of prior works on continual learning have addressed catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Li & Hoiem, 2017; Ratcliff, 1990; Rajasegaran et al., 2019;
2020), removing the need to store all prior data during training. Our method does not address
catastrophic forgetting for the meta-training phase, because we must still store all data so as to
“replay” it for meta-training, though it may be possible to discard or sub-sample old data (which we
leave to future work). However, our adaptation process is fully online. A number of works perform
meta-learning for better continual learning, i.e. learning good continual learning strategies (Al-
Shedivat et al., 2017; Nagabandi et al., 2018; Javed & White, 2019; Harrison et al., 2019; He et al.,
2019; Beaulieu et al., 2020). However, these prior methods still perform batch-mode meta-training,
while our method also performs the meta-training itself incrementally online, without task boundaries.
The closest work to ours is the follow the meta-leader (FTML) method (Finn et al., 2019) and its
variants (Yao et al., 2020). FTML is a varaint of MAML that finetunes to each new task in turn,
resetting to the meta-trained parameters between every task. While this method effectively accelerates
acquisition of new tasks, it requires ground truth knowledge of task boundaries and, as we show in
our experiments, our approach outperforms FTML even when FTML has access to task boundaries
and our method does not. One of the limitations of these gradinet based meta learning methods is
that, the memory requiment linearly increases with the number of inner loop updates. Ours has the
same limitations as MAML and FTML, and have same order of memory requirement.. Further, there
are some recent works which try to address Online meta learning Harrison et al. (2020); Denevi et al.
(2019) in a similar setting to ours. Oonline-within-Online Denevi et al. (2019) tries to learn fast
adaptation by learning from old tasks. However, OWO Denevi et al. (2019) requires the knowledge
about the task boundaries, while our method does not need any extra information about the task
boundaries. MOCA Harrison et al. (2020) address a very similar problem as ours, yet it tries to
find the task boundaries or change points from past data. On the other hand our method can work
even without estimating the change points. Additionaly Gupta et al. (2020); Caccia et al. (2020)
address on solving continual learning with meta learning. Both works tries to minimize catastrophic
forgetting, by precondition the meta gradients. While FOML focuses on rapidly learning new tasks,
it can learn from 1000+ tasks, while continual learning methods usually has 10 to 100 tasks.
3	Foundations
Prior to diving into online meta learning, we first briefly summarize meta learning, model agnostic
meta-learning, and online learning in this section.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Meta-learning: Meta-learning address the problem of learning to learn. It uses the knowledge
learned from previous tasks to quickly learn new tasks. Meta-learning assumes that the tasks are
drawn from a stationary distribution T 〜P(T). During the meta-training phase (outer-loop), N
tasks are assumed to be drawn from this distribution to produce the meta-training set, and the model
is trained in such a way that, when a new task with its own training and test data T = {DTtr , DTte} is
presented to it at meta-test time, the model should be able to adapt to this task quickly (inner-loop).
Using θ to denote the meta-trained parameters, the meta-learning objective is:
θ* = argminEDTr Where T〜P(T) [L(Fθ(DT), DT)] ,	(1)
θ
where Fθ is the meta-learned adaptation process that reads in the training set Dttr and outputs
task-specific parameters, prototypes, or features (depending on the method) for the new task Ti .
Model-agnostic meta-learning: In MAML (Finn et al., 2017), the inner-loop function is
(stochastic) gradient decent. Hence, during the MAML inner-loop adaptation, Fθ (Ditr) becomes
θ - aVLθ (θ, Dtr) (or, more generally, multiple gradient steps). Intuitively, what this means is that
meta-training with MAML produces a parameter vector θ that can quickly adapt to any task from the
meta-training distribution via gradient descent on the task loss. One of the principle benefits of this is
that, when faced with a new task that differs from those seen during meta-training, the algorithm “at
worst” adapts with regular gradient descent, and at best is massively accelerated by the meta-training.
Online learning: In online learning, the model faces a sequence of loss functions {Lt }t∞=1 and a
sequence of data {Dt = {(x, y)}}∞=ι for every time step t. The function f : X → y maps inputs
X to predictions y. The goal of an online learning algorithm is to find a set of parameters for each
time step {φ}∞=ι, such that the overall loss between the predictions y and the ground truth labels y is
minimized over the sequence. This is typically quantified in terms of regret:
TT
RegretT =XLt(φ,Dt) -XLt(φt,Dt).	(2)
where, φt = argminφ Lt(φ, Dt). The first term measures the loss from the online model, and the
second term measures the loss of the best possible model on that task. Various online algorithms try
to minimize the regret as much as possible when introducing new tasks.
4	Online Meta-Learning: Problem Statement and Methods
In an online meta-learning setting (Finn et al., 2019), the model fφ observes datapoints one at a time
from a online data stream S. Each datapoint consists of an input Xtm, where t is the task index and
m is the index of the datapoint within that task, and a label ymt . The task changes over time and the
model should be able to update the parameters φ to minimize the loss at each time step. The goal
of online meta-learning is to quickly learn each new task Tt and perform well as soon as possible
according to the specified loss function.
A simple baseline solution would be to just train the model on the current task Tt . We denote this
baseline as TFS (Train from Scratch). For every new task, the model simply trains a new set of
parameters using all of the data from the current task Tt that has been seen so far:
1M
Φtfs = argmin M E Lt(Φ, (Xm,藐)).
TFS has two issues. First, it requires the task boundaries to be known, which can make it difficult to
apply to settings where this information is not available. Second, it does not utilize knowledge from
other tasks, which greatly limits its performance even when task boundaries are available.
A straightforward way to utilize knowledge from other tasks of the online data stream is to store all
the seen tasks in a large buffer B, and simply keep training the model on all of the seen tasks. We
will refer to this baseline method as TOE (Train on Everything):
1 tM
φToE = argmin MtE E Li(φ, (xm,ym)).
φ	i=1 m=1
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
TOE learns a function that fits all of the previously seen samples. However, this function may be far
from optimal for the task at hand, because the different tasks may be mutually exclusive. Therefore,
fitting a single model on all of the previously seen tasks might not provide a good task-specific model
for the current task. A more sophisticated baseline, which we refer to as FTL (Follow the Leader),
pre-trains a model on all of the previous tasks, and then fine-tunes it only on the data from the current
task. Note that this is subtly different from FTL in the classic online learning setting, due to the
difference in problem formulation. This can be achieved by initializing φ with pretrained weights up
to the previous task φtT-O1E .
1M
φFTL = argmin M E Lt(φTo1E,(xm, ytm)).
φ	m=1
Here, for the task t, we take a model that is pre-trained on all previously seen tasks (fφt-1 ) and
fine-tune on the current task data. In this way, FTL can use the past knowledge to more quickly adapt
to the new task. However, pre-training on past tasks may not necessarily result in an initialization that
is conducive to fast adaptation (Finn et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Li
et al., 2017). Finn et al. (Finn et al., 2019) proposed a MAML-based online meta-learning approach,
where MAML is used to meta-train a “meta-leader” model on all previously seen tasks, which is then
adapted on all data from the current task. This way, the meta-leader parameters will be much closer
to new task optimal parameters, and because of this it is much faster to adapt to new tasks from the
online data.
φtFTML = argmin E(χm,ym)〜τt[Lt(ΦM-A ML, (x^m, Vm))]
φ	mm t
where, ΦMAML = argmin ETjS(T) [Lj (Φ - RLj (Φ, Djr), Dje)]
φj
FTL and FTML try to efficiently use knowledge from past tasks to quickly adapt to the new task.
However, pre-trained weights from FTL do not guarantee fast adaptation, and both methods require
ground-truth knowledge of task boundaries. This knowledge may not be realistic in many real-world
settings, where the tasks may change gradually and no external information is available to indicate
task transitions. Although FTML can enable fast adaptation, the model needs to be “reset” at each
task, essentially creating a “branch” on each task and maintaining two independent learning processes:
an adaptation process, whose result is discarded completely at the end of the task, and a meta-training
process, which does not influence the current task at all, and is only used for forward transfer into
future tasks. For this reason, we argue that FTL and FTML are not fully online. In this work, our
aim is to develop a fully online meta-learning method that continually performs both “fast” updates
and “slow” meta-updates, does not need to periodically “reset” the adapted parameters back to the
meta-parameters, and does not require any ground truth knowledge of task boundaries.
5	Fully Online Meta-Learning Without Task Boundaries
We first discuss the intuition behind how our approach handles online meta-learning without task
boundaries. In many real-world tasks, we might expect the tasks in the online data stream to change
gradually. This makes it very hard to draw a clear boundary between the tasks. Therefore, it is
necessary to relax task boundary assumption if we want a robust online learner that can work on a
real-world data stream. Additionally, since nearby data points are most likely to belong to the same
or similar task, we would expect adaptation to each new data point to be much faster from a model
that has already been adapted to other recent data points.
FOML maintains two separate parameter vectors for the online updates (φ) and the meta updates
(θ). Both parameterize the same architecture, such that fφ and fθ represent the same neural network,
but with different weights. The online model continuously reads in the latest datapoints from the
online data stream, and updates the parameters φ in online fashion, without any boundaries or resets.
However, simply updating the online model on each data point naively will not meta-train it to adapt
more quickly, and may even result in drift, where the model forgets prior data. Therefore, we also
incorporate a regularizer into the online update that is determined by a concurrent meta-learning
process (see Fig. 4). Note that FOML only incorporates the meta-parameters into the online updates
via the meta-learned regularization term, without ever resetting the online parameters back to the
meta-parameters (in contrast, e.g., to FTML (Finn et al., 2019)).
The meta-updates of previous MAML-based online meta-learning approaches involve sampling data
from all of the tasks seen so far, and then updating the meta-parameters θ based on the derivatives
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
of the MAML objective. This provides a diverse sampling of tasks for the meta update, though it
requires storing all of the seen data (Finn et al., 2019). We also use a MAML-style update for the
meta parameters, and also require storing the previously seen data. To this end, we will use B to
denote a buffer containing all of the data seen so far. Each new datapoint is added to B once the label
is observed. However, since we do not assume knowledge of task boundaries, we cannot sample
entire tasks from B, but instead must sample individual datapoints. We therefore adopt a different
strategy, which we describe in Section 5.2: as shown in Fig 4, instead of aiming to sample in complete
tasks from the data buffer, we simply sample random past datapoints, and meta-train the regularizer
so that the online updates retain good performance on all past data. We find that this strategy is
effective at accelerating acquisition of future tasks in online meta-learning settings where the tasks
are not mutual exclusive. We define both types of updates in detail in the next sections.
Figure 2: Overview of FOML learning: FOML UP-
dates the online parameters φ using only the most recent
K datapoints from the buffer B . Meta-learning learns
a regularizer, parameterized by meta-parameters θ , via
second-order MAML-style updates. The goal of meta-
learning is to make φ perform well on randomly sampled
prior datapoints after performing K steps with the meta-
trained regularizer.
5.1	Fully Online Adaptation
At each time step, FOML observes a data point Xt, predicts its label yt, then receives the true label yt
and updates the online parameters. In practice, we make updates after observing N new datapoints
(N = 10 in our experiments), so as to reduce the variance of the gradient updates. We create a small
dataset Dtjr with these N datapoints for the time step j . The true label for these datapoints can be
from class labels, annotations, rewards, or even self-supervision, though we focus on the supervised
classification setting in our experiments.
However, the online updates are based only on the most recent samples, and do not make use of any
past data. Therefore, we need some mechanism for the (slower) meta-training process to “transfer”
the knowledge it is distilling from the prior tasks into this online parameter vector. We can instantiate
such a mechanism by introducing a regularizer into the online parameter update that depends on the
meta-parameters θ, which we denote as R(φ, θ). While a variety of parameterizations could be used
for R(φ, θ), we opt for a simple squared error term of the form R(φ, θ) = (φ - θ)2, resulting in the
following online update at each step j :
φj = Φj-1 - αι Vφj-ι {L(φj-1; Djr)+ βιR(φj-1,θ)}
=Φj-1 - α1 Vφj-ιL(φj-1; Djr) + 2α1 β1 (θ - φj-1)
、-------------------V----------' 、-----------------}
task specific update	meta directional update
In the case of classification, L is the cross-entropy loss. α1 , β1 are hyperparameters. Next, we discuss
how these meta-parameters are trained so as to maximize the effectiveness of this regularizer at
accelerating adaption to new tasks.
5.2	Meta-Learning Without Task B oundaries
As discussed in the previous section, the online updates to φj include a regularizer R that transfers
knowledge from the meta-parameters θ into each online update. Additionally, our method maintains
a buffer B containing all data seen so far, which is used for the meta-update. In contrast to prior
methods, which explicitly draw a training and validation set from the buffer (i.e., a query and support
set) and then perform a separate “inner loop” update on this training set (Finn et al., 2019), our
meta-updates recycle the inner loop adaptation that is already performed via the online updates, and
therefore we only draw a validation set Dvmal from the buffer B. Specifically, we sample a set of N
datapoints at random from B to form Dvmal . We then update the meta-parameters θ using the gradient
of the loss on Dvmal and the regularizer R after the last K updates on φ. In other words, we adjust the
meta-parameters in such a way that, if an online update is regularized with this meta-weights, then
the loss on the online update will be minimized. This can be expressed via following meta update:
θ=θ-α2Vθ
卜φj; Dmal)+ β2
)
K
XR(θ,φj-k)
k=0
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Here, θ and φj are only related via regularization term, unlike FTML (Finn et al., 2019), which sets
φ0 = θ at every task boundary.
The choice of sampling Dvmal at random from B has several interpretations. We can interpret this as
regularizing φ to prevent the online parameters from drifting away from solutions that also work
well on the entire data buffer. However, this interpretation is incomplete, since the meta-update
doesn’t simply keep φ close to a single parameter vector that works well on Dvmal, but rather changes
the regularizer so that gradient updates with that regularizer maximally improve performance on
Dvmal . This has the effect of actually accelerating how quickly φ can adapt to new tasks using this
regularizer, so long as past tasks are reasonably representative of prior tasks. We experimentally
verify this claim in our experiments. Note, however, that this scheme does assume that the tasks are
not mutually exclusive. In future work, it would also be interesting to explore more sophisticated
strategies for sampling Dvmal, for example by leveraging temporal coherence and drawing N sequential
points, which are more likely to belong to the same task. We summarize the complete algorithm in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Online Meta Learning with FOML
1	: procedure META TRAINING
2	: Require: θ, B, φ, Buffer B, Data stream S
3	φ0 ・ φ
4	:	while Data stream S available do
5	Dj — S	. get new data from online data-stream
6	B — B + D	. add new data to the buffer
7	:	Dtjr , Dvj al — D	. partition the data into train and validation splits
8	ytr — fφj-ι (Djr)	. make predictions on the train set
9	φj — φj-1 - αι Vφj-1 {Ltask(φj-1; Djr)+ βι R(φj-1,θ)}
10	Oval — Φj (Djai)	. Evaluate the updated model on the validation set
11	Dmal 〜random-sample(B)	. sample random batch from buffer
12	θ — θ - α2Vθ{Ltask (φj; Dmll) + β2 PK=I R(φj-k,θ)}
13	j — j + 1
6	Experimental Evaluation
Our experiments focus on online meta-learning tasks based on supervised classification. In these
settings, an effective algorithm should adapt to changing tasks as quickly as possible, rapidly
identifying when the task has changed and adjusting its parameters accordingly. Furthermore, a
successful algorithm should make use of past task shifts to meta-learn effectively, thus accelerating the
speed with which it adapts to future task changes. In all cases, the algorithm receives one data point
at a time, and the task changes periodically. In order to allow for a comparison with prior methods,
which generally assume known task boundaries, the data stream is partitioned into discrete tasks, but
our algorithm is not aware of which datapoint belongs to which tasks or where the boundaries occur.
The prior methods, in contrast, are provided with this information, thus giving them an advantage.
We first describe the specific task formulations, and then the prior methods that we compare to.
Online meta-learning algorithms should adapt to each task as quickly as possible, and also use data
from past tasks to accelerate acquisition of future tasks. Therefore, we report our results as a learning
curve, with one axis corresponding to the number of seen tasks, and the other axis corresponding to
the cumulative error rate on that task. This error rate is computed using a held-out validation data for
each task after the adaptation that task. We evaluate prior online meta-learning methods and baselines
on two different datasets (Rainbow-MNIST and CIFAR100). TOE (train on everything), TFS (train
from scratch), FTL (follow the leader) and FTML (follow the meta-leader) (Finn et al., 2019) are the
baseline methods we compare against our method FOML. See Section 4 for more detailed description
of these methods.
Datasets: We compare TOE, TFS, FTL, FTML and FOML on two different datasets. Rainbow-
MNIST (Finn et al., 2019) was created by changing the background color, scale and rotation of the
MNIST dataset. It includes 7 different background colors, 2 scales (full and half) and 4 different
rotations. This leads to a total of 56 number of tasks. Each individual task is to classify the images
into 10 classes. We use the same partition with 900 samples per each task, as in prior work (Finn
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
OnIIna-ClFAHlin
ew βw
MWnfc«r of -
ɪow "a
HaInbow-MiiiST
Figure 3: Comparison between online algorithms: We compare our method with baselines and prior approaches,
including TFS (Train from Scratch), TOE (Train on Everything), FTL (Follow the Leader) and FTML (Follow
the Meta Leader). a: Performance relative to the number of tasks seen over the course of online training on
the Rainbow-MNIST dataset. As the number of task increases, FOML achieves lower error rates compared
to other methods. b: Error rates on the Online-CIFAR100 dataset. Note that FOML not only achieves lower
error rates on average, but also reaches the lowest error (of around 17%) more quickly than the other methods.
c: We also compare our method with continual learning baselines LwF Li & Hoiem (2017), iCaRL Rebuffi
et al. (2016) and MOCA Harrison et al. (2020). MOCA Harrison et al. (2020) archive similar performance to
ours at the end of the learning, FOML can converge quickly, and faster compared to MOCA. d: Performance of
FOML on CELEBA dataset. This dataset contains more than 1000 classes and we follow the same protocol as in
Online-CIFAR100 experiments. Our method converges faster than other baseline methods on CELEBA with
150 number of tasks.
et al., 2019). However, this task contains relatively simple images, and only 56 tasks. To create a
much longer task sequence with significantly more realistic images, we modified the CIFAR-100
dataset to create an online meta-learning benchmark, which we call online-CIFAR100. Every task is
a randomly sampled set of classes, and the goal is to classify whether two images in this set belongs
to same class or not. Specifically, each task corresponds to 5 classes from CIFAR-100, and every
datapoint consists of a pair of images, each corresponding to one of the 5 classes for that task. The
goal is to predict whether the two images belong to the same class or not. Note that different tasks are
not mutually exclusive, which in principle should favor a TOE-style method, since meta-learning is
known to underperform with non-mutually-exclusive tasks (Yin et al., 2019). To make sure the data
distribution changes smoothly over tasks, we only change a subset of the classes between consecutive
tasks. This allow us to create a very large number of tasks (1200), and evaluate our method and the
baselines on much longer and more realistic task sequences.
Implementation Details: We use a simple 4 layer convolutional neural network with 8,16,32,64
filters at each layer for both experiments. However, for the CIFAR-100 experiments, a Siamese
version of the same network is used. All the methods were trained via a cross-entropy loss, with their
best performing hyper-parameters, on a single NVIDA-2080 GPU machine. Please see Appendix A.1
for more details on hyper-parameters and network architecture.
Results on Rainbow-MNIST: As shown in Fig 3, FOML attains the lowest error rate on most tasks
in Rainbow-MNIST, except a small segment in the very beginning. The performance of TFS is similar
performance across all the tasks, and does not improve over time. This is because it resets its weights
every time it encounters a new task, and therefore cannot not gain any advantage from past data. TOE
has larger error rates at the start, but as we add more data into the buffer, TOE is able to improve. On
the other hand, both FTL and FTML start with similar performance, but FTML achieve much lower
error rates at the end of the sequence compared to FTL, consistently with prior work (Finn et al.,
2019). The final error rates of FOML are around 10%, and it reaches this performance significantly
faster than FTML, after less than 20 tasks. Note that FTML also has access to task boundaries, while
FOML does not.
Results on Online-CIFAR100: We use a Siamese network for this experiment, where each image
is fed into a 7-layer convolutional network, and each branch outputs a 128 dimensional embedding
vector. A difference of these vectors are fed into a fully connected layer for the final classification.
Each task contains data from 5 classes of CIFAR-100, and each new task introduces three new classes,
and retains two of the classes from the previous task, providing a degree of temporal coherence while
still requiring each algorithm to handle persistent shift in the task. Fig 3 shows the error rates of
various online learning methods, where each method is trained over a sequence of 1200 tasks. All the
methods start with initial error rates of 50%. The tasks are not mutually exclusive, so in principle TOE
can attain good performance, but it makes the slowest progress among all the methods, suggesting
that simple pretraining is not sufficient to accelerate learning. FTL uses a similar pre-training strategy
as TOE. However it has an adaptation stage where the model is fine-tuned on the new task. This
allows it to make slower progress. As expected from prior work (Finn et al., 2019), the meta-learning
procedure used by FTML allows it to make faster progress than FTL. However, FOML makes faster
progress on average, and achieves the lowest final error rate (〜15%) after sequence of 1200 tasks.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
6.1	Ablation Studies
We perform various ablations by varying the number of online parameters used for the meta-update
K , importance of meta-model to analysis the properties of our method.
Number of online parameters used for the meta-update: Our method periodically updates the
online weights and meta weights. The meta-updates involves taking K recent online parameters and
updating the meta model via MAML gradient. Therefore, meta-updates depend on the trajectory of
the online parameters. In this experiment, we investigate how the performance of FOML changes
as we vary the number of parameters used for the meta-update (K in Algorithm 1). Fig ?? shows
the performance of our method with various values of K: K = [1, 2, 3, 5, 10]. We can see that
the performance improves when we update the meta parameters over longer trajectory of online
parameters (larger K). We speculate that this is due to the longer sequences providing a clearer signal
for how the meta-parameters influence online updates over many steps.
Importance of meta update: FOML keeps track of separate online parameters and meta-parameters,
and each of them is updated via corresponding updates. However, only the online parameters φ
are used for evaluation, while the meta-parameters θ only influence them via the regularizer, and
have no direct effect on evaluation performance. This might raise the question: how important is the
contribution of the meta-parameters to the performance of the algorithm during online training? We
train a model with and without meta-updates, and the performance is shown in Fig ??. None that, the
model without meta-updates is identical to our method, except that the meta-updates themselves are
not performed. We can clearly see that the model trained with meta-updates preforms much better
than a model trained without meta-updates. The model trained without meta-updates generally does
not improve significantly as more tasks are seen, while the model trained with meta-updates improves
with each task, and reaches significantly lower final error. This shows that, even though θ and φ are
decoupled and only connected via a regularization, the meta-learning component of our method really
is critical for its good performance.
Figure 4: Ablation experiments: a) We vary the num-
ber of online updates K used before the meta-update,
to see how it affects the performance of our method.
The performance of FOML improves as the number of
online updates is increased. b) This experiment shows
how FOML performs with and without meta updates,
to confirm that the meta-training is indeed an essential
component of our method. With meta-updates, FOML
learns more quickly, and performance improves with
more tasks.
7 Conclusion
We presented FOML, a MAML-based algorithm for online meta-learning that does not require ground
truth knowledge of task boundaries, and does not require resetting the parameter vector back to
the meta-learned parameters for every task. FOML is conceptually simple, maintaining just two
parameter vectors over the entire online adaptation process: a vector of online parameters φ, which
are updated continually on each new batch of datapoints, and a vector of meta-parameters θ, which
are updated correspondingly with meta-updates to accelerate the online adaptation process, and
influence the online updates via a regularizer. We find that even a relatively simple task sampling
scheme that selects datapoints at random from a buffer of all seen data enables effective meta-training
that accelerates the speed with which FOML can adapt to each new task, and we find that FOML
reaches a final performance that is comparable to or better than baselines and prior methods, while
learning to adapt quickly to new tasks significantly faster. While our work focuses on supervised
classification problems, a particularly exciting direction for future work is to extend such online
meta-learning methods to other types of online supervision that may be more readily available,
including self-supervision and prediction, so that models equipped with online meta-learning can
continually improve as they see more of the world.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
References
Maruan Al-Shedivat, Trapit Bansal, Yuri Burda, Ilya Sutskever, Igor Mordatch, and Pieter Abbeel.
Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.03641, 2017.
Antreas Antoniou, Harrison Edwards, and Amos Storkey. How to train your maml. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.09502, 2018.
Shawn Beaulieu, Lapo Frati, Thomas Miconi, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, Jeff Clune, and Nick
Cheney. Learning to continually learn. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09571, 2020.
Massimo Caccia, Pau Rodriguez, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Fabrice Normandin, Min Lin, Lucas Caccia,
Issam Laradji, Irina Rish, Alexandre Lacoste, David Vazquez, et al. Online fast adaptation and
knowledge accumulation: a new approach to continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05856,
2020.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Ggbor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge university
press, 2006.
Giulia Denevi, Dimitris Stamos, Carlo Ciliberto, and Massimiliano Pontil. Online-within-online
meta-learning. In ADVANCES IN NEURAL INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS 32 (NIPS
2019), volume 32,pp.1-11. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), 2019.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1126-1135. PMLR, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Online meta-learning. In
Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
1920-1930. PMLR, 09-15 Jun 2019.
Gunshi Gupta, Karmesh Yadav, and Liam Paull. La-maml: Look-ahead meta learning for continual
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13904, 2020.
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning
without tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.08866, 2019.
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning
without tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. corr abs/1512.03385 (2015), 2015.
Xu He, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Galashov, Andrei A Rusu, Yee Whye Teh, and Razvan Pascanu.
Task agnostic continual learning via meta learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05201, 2019.
Khurram Javed and Martha White. Meta-learning representations for continual learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.12588, 2019.
Ghassen Jerfel, Erin Grant, Thomas L Griffiths, and Katherine Heller. Reconciling meta-learning and
continual learning with online mixtures of tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06080, 2018.
Rong Jin, Steven CH Hoi, and Tianbao Yang. Online multiple kernel learning: Algorithms and
mistake bounds. In International conference on algorithmic learning theory, pp. 390-404. Springer,
2010.
Jyrki Kivinen, Alexander J Smola, and Robert C Williamson. Online learning with kernels. IEEE
transactions on signal processing, 52(8):2165-2176, 2004.
Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
image recognition. In ICML deep learning workshop, volume 2. Lille, 2015.
10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
VolUtional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing Systems, 25:1097-1105,
2012.
Da Li and Timothy Hospedales. Online meta-learning for multi-source and semi-supervised domain
adaptation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 382-403. Springer, 2020.
Zhenguo Li, Fengwei Zhou, Fei Chen, and Hang Li. Meta-sgd: Learning to learn quickly for few-shot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09835, 2017.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935-2947, 2017.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109-165.
Elsevier, 1989.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai and Hong Yu. Meta networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 2554-2563. PMLR, 2017.
Anusha Nagabandi, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Deep online learning via meta-learning:
Continual adaptation for model-based rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07671, 2018.
Alex Nichol and John Schulman. Reptile: a scalable metalearning algorithm. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.02999, 2(3):4, 2018.
Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.
Eunbyung Park and Junier B Oliva. Meta-curvature. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03356, 2019.
Jathushan Rajasegaran, Munawar Hayat, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Ling Shao.
Random path selection for incremental learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2019.
Jathushan Rajasegaran, Salman Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah.
itaml: An incremental task-agnostic meta-learning approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13588-13597, 2020.
Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.
Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. 2016.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl: Incremental classi-
fier and representation learning. corr abs/1611.07725 (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07725,
2016.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In International conference on machine
learning, pp. 1842-1850. PMLR, 2016.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.05175, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1-9, 2015.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one
shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29:3630-3638, 2016.
11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Flood Sung Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr, and Timothy M Hospedales.
Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning.(2018). 2017.
Huaxiu Yao, Yingbo Zhou, Mehrdad Mahdavi, Zhenhui Li, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong.
Online structured meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11545, 2020.
Mingzhang Yin, George Tucker, Mingyuan Zhou, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-learning
without memorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03820, 2019.
Guanyu Zhou, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Online incremental feature learning with denoising
autoencoders. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.1453-1461. PMLR, 2012.
12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A	Appendix
A. 1 Implementation Details-RainbowMNIST
All the images from Rainbow-MNIST are in 28 × 28 pixel resolution and with 3 channels. We used a
4 layer convolutional neural network for these experiments, with each layer having [32,32,64,64]
number of filters. After every convolution ReLU activation and max pooling is applied to the features.
At the last layer we take an average pooling. Finally, 64 dimensional features are passed through fully
connected layer with a sigmoid activation. Since the Rainbow-MNIST uses MNIST data to classify,
the final layer has 10 neurons, and the objective is to correctly classify the digits of different scales
and colors into 10 classes (actual numbers irrespective of the rotation and background color). All the
models were trained with 50 gradient updates.
A.2 Implementation Details-ONLINE-CIFAR100
All the images from CIFAR100 are in 32 × 32 pixel resolution and with 3 channels. We used a
similar 7 layer convolutional neural network in a siamese network architecture for these experiments,
with each layer having [32,32,32,64,64,64,128] number of filters. After every convolution ReLU
activation and batchnorm is applied to the features. Every other layers have max-pooling. At the last
layer we take an average pooling. The L2 distance between two images are calculated and a fully
connected layer is used to classify the two images as same class or not.
A.3 Baseline Methods
TFS: Every time this model sees a new task (This needs to know the task boundary), the model resets
to new sets of random weights. After that the model is trained only using the data from the new task.
At the same time, we also rest the optimizer state to remove any effect of momentum from previous
updates. The model is trained with Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001.
TOE: Although TOE optimize the parameters on the all available task, training the model using all
the available data is practically impossible. Therefore, we sample datapoints from the buffer and
update the model parameters. However, since the number of data is increasing over time, the model
also needs be updated on a good representative data of the online stream. Therefore, we increase the
number of gradient updates over time. For ONLINE-CIFAR100 experiment, the number of gradients
updates are increased by 10 for every 100 tasks. The model is trained with Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.001.
FTL: This method, first pretrains a model on the past data, and then fine-tune it on the very recent
samples. Similar to TOE, we first train a set of weights using the datapoints in the data buffer. After
that, the model is fine-tuned on the correct task data. However, after this adaptation and evaluation
the fine-tuned weights are simply discarded and the pretraining starts from the initial weights of the
adaptation process. Adam optimizer with same configuration is used to train this model.
FTML: The FTML updates the meta-parameters using MAML style update. For that, we trained
the FTML with 5 inner-loop updates (each inner-loop have task-specific data for the inner-loop
adaptation). After the meta-update, the meta-parameters are used as the initialization for the inner-
loop adaptation, and similar to FTL the adapted weights are simply discarded after evaluation. The
inner-loop is trained with SGD with a learning rate of 0.001 and the outer-loop is trained with a
learning rate of 0.0005.
FOML: Our method also have two sets of parameter vectors, thus two different optimizers. We
use Adam for both online and meta updates with a learning rate of 0.001 for both cases. Since, our
online updates share the meta-knowledge via the regularization term, the β1 controls how much pull
is applied to the meta parameters by the online parameters. We use 0.01 for β1. Similarly the pull on
meta-parameters by the online parameters is controlled by β2, and we use 0.001 in our experiments.
13