Figure 1: Different approaches to geospa-tial data stream forecasting: predictingover input data streams that are inherentlygrid-structured, e.g., video frames usingConvLSTMs (top); mapping of point-cloud input to a grid, e.g., mobile net-work traffic collected at different anten-nas in a city, to enable forecasting usingexisting neural network structures (mid-dle); forecasting directly over point-clouddata streams using historical information(as above, but without pre-processing), asproposed in this paper (bottom).
Figure 2: Illustration of the DConv op-erator, with a single input channel andK = 6 neighbors. For every p ∈ Si1n ,DConv weights its K neighboring setQK = {p^n, ∙ ∙ ∙ ,pfn} to produce valuesand coordinate features for p0n ∈ So1ut .
Figure 3: The inner structure of the CloudLSTM cell (left) and the overall Seq2seq CloudLSTMarchitecture (right). We denote by (∙)ν and (∙)ς the value and coordinate features of each input, whilethese features are unified for gates.
Figure 4: MAE evolution wrt. prediction horizon achieved by RNN-based models on both cities formobile traffic forecasting.
Figure 5: The anonymized locations of the antenna set in both cities.
Figure 6: Fraction of the total traffic consumed by each mobile service (left) and each service category(right) in the considered set.
Figure 7: Geographic distribution of 437 air quality monitoring stations in both city clusters. Figuresadapted from the readme.pdf file included with the dataset.
Figure 8: Mobile service-level MAE evaluation on both cities for the Attention CloudLSTMs,averaged over 36 prediction steps.
Figure 9: MAE evolution wrt. prediction horizon achieved by RNN-based models on both cityclusters for the air quality forecasting.
Figure 10: The scatter distributions of theCloudLSTM and Attention CloudLSTM.
Figure 11:Step 2Step 3Step 4Step 5Step 9Step 10Step 12NO2 forecasting examples in City Cluster A generated by all RNN-based models.
Figure 12: NO2 forecasting examples in Cluster B generated by the RNN-based models.
Figure 13:	Clustering results in the two City clusters using DBSCAN.
Figure 14:	Positions of weather stations after moving outliers towards the edge with different distancesd in city cluster A.
Figure 15: Positions of weather stations after moving outliers towards the edge with different distancesd in city cluster B.
