Figure 1: Visual demonstrations of LEG for a single input. LEG seeks to find a local linear approx-imation of f(x) in a neighborhood around x0; choice of the distribution, F, determines the size ofthe neighborhood. In Figure 1a, we compare LEG to the gradient, which is very localized. If f(x)is a highly varying function, then the gradient is too noisy, and the saliency score provided by LEGis more meaningful. In Figure 1b, we show LEG for two different distributions. For the distributionwith the larger variance, LEG evaluates the input’s effect on the output for a larger neighborhoodaround x0.
Figure 2: LEG estimates for various images. Target classes are provided in the captions. LEGcorrectly detects the main object in all of the instances. Third image is labeled as a “cellphone” butthe VGG-19 network misclassifies it as a “whistle”. More results are provided in the Appendix.
Figure 3: Selected eigenvectors of the proposed Σ. The eigenvectors, which contain the principaldirections of the distribution, have maxima and minima in adjacent locations. Distributions drawnwith these properties perform as object detectors as they can be used to detect existence (or non-existence) of significant pixels at these locations.
Figure 4: Demonstration of the new perturbation scheme on an example from the MNIST dataset.
Figure 5: Results of the sanity check with cascading randomization. The network weights arereplaced by random numbers in a cascading order, starting from the last layer. LEG is equal to zerofor all pixel values immediately after the first randomization.
Figure 6: Results of sensitivity analysis. Log of the predicted probability for the target class isplotted versus the size of the perturbation. The locations for the perturbations are determined bythe saliency procedures. Predictions should decrease at a fast rate for interpretability methods thatcan reliably identify regions of importance. In that regard, SHAP and LEG0 appear to be the mostaccurate in determining the critical pixels, followed by LEG, GradCAM, C-Shapley and LIME.
Figure 7: Masked regions at 10% perturbation by various saliency procedures.
Figure 8: Saliency estimates from various procedures on the MNIST dataset for a LeNet (LeCunet al., 1998). The listed procedures are the empirical version of LEG [LEG-Exact], LEG, DirectSaliency, DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017), ELRP (Bach et al., 2015), Occlusion Maps and SHAP(Lundberg & Lee, 2017)15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020A.6 Examples on ImageNet(a) Balloon(b) Beacon(c) Bear(d) Bookcase(e) Daisy	(f) Elephant(g) Helmet Crab	(h) Ice Cream(i) Lemon(j) LifeboatFigure 9: LEG estimates for various images from the ImageNet dataset. Target classes are providedin the captions.
Figure 9: LEG estimates for various images from the ImageNet dataset. Target classes are providedin the captions.
Figure 10: LEG estimates for various images from the ImageNet dataset. Target classes are providedin the captions.
