Figure 1: Synthetic experiment: Distribution of genuine (green and blue dots) and poisoning (reddots) data points for different values of α. The poisoning points are labelled as green.
Figure 2: Test classification error (%) as a function of the percentage of poisoning points usingpGAN with different values of α for MNIST (left) and FMNIST (right).
Figure 3: Examples from pGAN (with α = 0.3) for MNIST (left) and FMNIST (right).
Figure 4: (Left) Average error on CIFAR as a function of α. (Right) Examples of images generatedby pGAN for CIFAR (α = 0.3).
Figure 5: (Left) Average test error on MNIST as a function of λ0 = λ∕Pr(Yp). (Centre) Outlierdetection on MNIST as a function of α for α-percentiles of 0.95 and 0.90. (Right) Average testerror on MNIST as a function of of the number of training examples for a clean and a poisonedclassifier (with 20% of poisoning points).
Figure 6: Average test error (left), false positive (centre) and false negative rates (right) as a functionof the percentage of poisoning points for pGAN and label flipping attacks on MNIST.
Figure 7: (Left) Overall classification error and error of digit 3 being classified as 5 in MNIST (withall classes), as a function of the attack strength with pGAN. (Right) Difference in the confusionmatrix between the clean and the poisoned classifier (4% poisoning).
Figure 8: Test classification error (%) as a function of the percentage of poisoning points usingpGAN with α = 0.1 for MNIST (left) and FMNIST (centre) using outlier detection,Sever (with= 0.1), and the PCA-based defence (with = 0.05). Right-most plot compares the test error ofoutlier detection and label sanitization defences in MNIST.
Figure 9: Synthetic experiment: Distribution of genuine (green and blue dots) and poisoning (reddots) data points for different values of α. The poisoning points are labelled as green.
Figure 10: Examples from PGAN on MNIST dataset for different values of α.
Figure 11: Examples from PGAN on FMNIST dataset for different values of α.
Figure 12: Examples from pGAN with CIFAR dataset for different values of α.
Figure 13: Test classification error(%) for Sever (with = [0.05, 0.1, 0.2]) as a function of thepercentage of poisoning points using pGAN with α = 0.1 for MNIST (left) and FMNIST (right).
Figure 14: Test classification error(%) for the PCA-based defence (with = [0.05, 0.1, 0.2]) as afunction of the percentage of poisoning points using pGAN with α = 0.1 for MNIST (left) andFMNIST (right).
Figure 15: Test classification error(%) for label sanitization and outlier detection defences as afunction of the percentage of poisoning points using pGAN with α = 0.1 for MNIST (left) andFMNIST (right).
