Figure 1: Typical representation of Hi-C interaction map as a genome-wide contact matrix, or aheatmap. Bright triangles can be visible across the diagonal. These structures are called TADs(topologically associating domains) and interpreted as compact globules of interacting chromatin.
Figure 2: Annotation of TADs at different gamma parameter values is on the left side. Highergamma values correspond to smaller TADs. Transitional gamma is the value of gamma at whichgenomic bin switches from being a part of a TAD to being a part of an inter-TAD or a TAD boundary.
Figure 3: Scheme of Bidirectional LSTM Recurrent Neural Networks with one output that wasimplemented. The values of {x1, .., xt} are the DNA bins with input window size t, {h1, .., ht} arethe hidden states of the RNN model, yt/2 represents the corresponding target values Transitionalgamma of bins the middle bin xt/2 .
Figure 4: Weights of features of 5 trained Linear Regression models (rows) on the dataset with 5ChIP-Seq features (columns)We adopted the same approach to the second dataset of ChIP-Seq characteristics. In comparison tothe same application on a dataset of five features the coefficient order by absolute weights valuesis less stable (a table with sorting of the indexes of features by their weights can be seen in Sup-plementary Section). The numbers of occurrences of each of the feature indexes in the list of mostinfluencing features were calculated. We have sorted the features based on this frequency number.
Figure 5: Weighted Mean Square Error of trained Bidirectional LSTM. The upper row of graphspresent the results for the train dataset, the bottom row shows wMSE counted on the test objects.
Figure 6: On the left the weighted Mean Square Error on Train and Test dataset while droppingout one of the input ChIP-Seq features and wMSE of training using all features. On the right thedifference between the weighted Mean Square Error using all the features and dropping each oneseparately. Blue bars correspond to the wMSE on a testing dataset, red - training. BidirectionalLSTM with 64 units and six input bins was used.
Figure 7: Histograms of (A) original ChIP-Seq data and (B) normalized data of first 8 ChIP-Seqfeatures of all input bins.
Figure 8:	Weighted Mean Square Error on Train and Test dataset while dropping out one of theinput ChIP-Seq features and using this full dataset. Bidirectional LSTM with 64 units with six inputbins with Early Stopping was used.
Figure 9:	Weights of features of 8 trained Linear Regression models (corresponding to the rows) ofthe second dataset of ChIP-Seq characteristics (columns).
Figure 10:	MSE, MAE, R2, weighted MSE metrics for various ML models experiments. Here ”LR”stands for Linear Regression models, ”GB-X” - Grad Boosting models with X estimators, ”* best”means that the presented scores for the best of models of type *.
