Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed architectureAn evolving network is a graph whose topology changes as a function of time. Interestingly, almostall real-world networks evolve over time by adding and removing nodes and/or edges. For instance, insocial networks, people make and lose friends over time, while there are people who join the networkand others who leave the network. An evolving graph is a sequence of graphs {G0, G1, . . . , GT } whereGt = (At, Xt, Et) represents the state of the evolving graph at time step t. It should be noted that notonly nodes and edges can evolve over time, but also node and edge attributes. However, in this paper,we keep node and edge attributes fixed, and we allow only the node and edge sets of the graphs tochange as a function of time. The sequence can thus be written as {Gt = (At, X, E)}t∈[0,T] . We areoften interested in predicting what “comes next” in a sequence, based on data encountered in previoustime steps. In our setting, this is equivalent to predicting Gt based on the sequence {Gk }k<t. Insequential modeling, we usually do not take into account the whole sequence, but only those instanceswithin a fixed small window of size w before Gt, which we denote as {Gt-w, Gt-w+1, . . . , Gt-1}.
Figure 2:	Results of synthetic datasets. Comparison of graph size (path, ladder and cycle graphs fromleft to right): predicted size (blue) VS. real size (orange).
Figure 3:	Similarity histograms on BTC-OTC (left) and BTC-Alpha (right) datasets. Blue one is theresult of EvoNet, which is compared against 6 random graph models.
Figure 4:	Comparison of graph size: predicted size (blue) VS. real size (orange). Left: Path graphswith removal; Right: Cycle graphs with adding extra structuresDistribution of Similarities between real andDistribution of Similarities between real and250sφuue-jsu- jo JaqEnN200Proposed■ Erdos-Renyl■ BarabasI-AJbert■ PcwerIaw-CIusterSBMKrOneCker-randomKrOneCker-fix150hL0 0.0 1 0.204  ......~0^6^Similanty^δT
Figure 5:	Similarity histograms on synthetic datasets. Blue one is the result of EvoNet, which iscompared against 6 random graph models. 5a: Path graphs; 5b: Ladder graphs; 5c: Cycle graphs; 5d:Path graphs with removal; 5e: Cycle graphs with adding extra structures.
Figure 6: Some examples of predictions on Path datasets: the left column is the real graphs and theright column is the predicted ones.
Figure 7: Some examples of predictions on Ladder datasets (with small size graphs): the left columnis the real graphs and the right column is the predicted ones.
Figure 8: Some examples of predictions on Ladder datasets (with large size graphs): the left columnis the real graphs and the right column is the predicted ones.
Figure 9: Some examples of predictions on Cycle datasets: the left column is the real graphs and theright column is the predicted ones.
Figure 10: Some examples of predictions on Path datasets with removal: the left column is the realgraphs and the right column is the predicted ones.
Figure 11: Some examples of predictions on Cycle datasets with adding extra structures: the leftcolumn is the real graphs and the right column is the predicted ones.
