Figure 1: Illustration for a 2-dimensional linear ODE: Forecasted augmented latent space withrespect to the true states given (left) the same initial condition as the training sequence and (right)a different initial condition. Given the initial condition we illustrate both the prediction (forecastup to the end of the training time) of the trained model and the extrapolation (forecast beyond thetraining time) performances with respect to the true trajectory .The projection of the solutions in thereal plane illustrates the forecasting of the observations.
Figure 2: Evolution of the learnt latent space: starting from a random initialization of the aug-mented states zi , the latent space is optimized according to the minimization of Eq. (6) to form alimit-cycle similar to the true Lorenz 63 attractor. We depict 3-dimensional projections of the learntlatent space for the proposed model with different embedding dimensions from dE = 3 to dE = 6.
Figure 3: Analysis of the eigenvalues of the NbedDyn model Jacobian matrix.: Lorenz-63 case-study with dE = 6(a) Eigenvalues real part.
Figure 4: Analysis of the eigenvalues of the NbedDyn model Jacobian matrix.: Sea Level Anomalycase-study with dE = 6016Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020The analysis of the eigenvalues of the Sea Level Anomaly model in the other hand are not as straight-forward as in the case of the Lorenz model since we do not have any idea on the analytical form ofthe underlying dynamical model. Fig. 4 illustrates that using a 60 dimensional latent space for theNbedDyn model, only 50 eigenvalues have non-zero modulus and thus, are effectively influencingthe underlying dynamics. The conclusion in this case is that the observed SLA data evolve in a 50dimensional latent space parametrised by the dynamical model fθ .
Figure 5: Generated time series of the proposed models. : Given the same initial condition, wegenerated a time series of 1000 time steps.
Figure 6: Forecasted Lorenz 63 state sequence given noisy and partial observations: Given noisyand partial observations, our model optimizes equation (7) to infer an initial condition that minimizethe forecasting of the observations.
Figure 7: Generated time series of the proposed models for the forecasting of the SLA dynamics.
Figure 8:	Forecasted EOF components of the proposed models.
Figure 9:	Forecasted SLA states of the proposed models.
