Figure 1: Agent model architecture. The visual module contracts the VAE unit. The languagemodule contracts GRU units. Visual module is composed of an encoder and a decoder. The encoderoutput is mapped to the latent space. The language module generates and learns a message thatcorresponds to a point in the latent space.
Figure 2: Transition of teacher’s loss function. The average of five trials is presented. Averagesfrom epoch = 700 to epoch = 900 were 0.018 and 0.017 for NORMAL and INTERNAL,respectively.
Figure 3: Dream reconstruction accuracy in each learning object.
Figure 4: Transition of teacher’s loss function. The average of five trials is presented. Averagefrom epoch = 700 to epoch = 900 and from epoch = 1000 to epoch = 1200 is 0.016.
Figure 5: Dream reconstruction accuracy in each learning object.
Figure 6: Agent learning participation tendency by internal reflection function: Those figuresshow the average of five trials. One agent has the teacher role. Therefore, the maximum value forthis graph is 99.
Figure 7: An example of Dream reconstructed from messages: The message below each figurewas input into the agent. The numbers in each figure represent the corresponding label numbers.
Figure 8: (Top) Correspondence between concepts and symbols. It is important that the symbolscorresponding to the concept are not random, have no bias, and have a one-to-one correspondence.
Figure 9: lead symbol composition analysis. We used the agent set in Section 4.4: NORMAL (top);INTERANL (middle); SWITHC (bottom). The figure on the left shows the lead symbol compositionanalysis. The figure on the right shows the label analysis.
Figure 10: Dream reconstruction sample of messages with formal rules. We used the agent setin Section 4.4.
Figure 11: Characteristic symbol sequence where Dream reconstruction is shown at the samesimilarity:The number upper each figure is the corresponding label number. These Dreams weregenerated by the message above the figure. The figure on the left half (black) shows high accuracy.
Figure 12: Visualization of language module representation. We used the agent set and agentnumber in Section 4.4: NORMAL (a,b,c); INTERNAL (d,e,f); SWITCH (g,h,i). The number beloweach figure is the corresponding label number. The color depends on the corresponding label.
