Figure 1: CycleGAN for simple 2D distributions. Small initialization tend to yield simple, orderedmappings (Left), whereas larger initialization yield complex, disordered ones (Right).
Figure 2: Left: Distance to the minimal transport mapping "Wasserstein 2 Transport" as a function ofthe initialization gain (domains are illustrated in Figure 1). Right: Transport cost of the CycleGANmapping as a function of init. gain. Metrics are averaged across 5 runs, and the standard deviation isplotted.
Figure 3: Male to Female translation (top) and the inverse (bottom). Intermediate images correspondto the interpolations provided by the network’s intermediate layers. The reverse mapping is obtainedFigure 4: CelebA experiment. Each column associates one input image to its outputs for differentmodels: CycleGAN and our model with different initial gain parameters. Our model gives consistentlythe same result while CycleGAN converges to different mappings depending on the parameter.
Figure 4: CelebA experiment. Each column associates one input image to its outputs for differentmodels: CycleGAN and our model with different initial gain parameters. Our model gives consistentlythe same result while CycleGAN converges to different mappings depending on the parameter.
Figure 5: Results for Biased CelebA. We wish to map faces that have the Non-Smiling and BlackHair attributes to Smiling, Black-Hair faces, while only accessing Smiling, Blond Hair faces forthe target domain. Our formulation with c(x, y) = kH (x) - H(y)k22, where H(x) corresponds tothe histogram of image x, is well adapted for solving this problem.
Figure 6: The Figure illustrates successive steps of the dynamic transportation of α to β together withthe notations used in the text. Each step could for example correspond to a transformation performedby an elementary module of a ResNet.
Figure 7: Hidden dynamics of CycleGan, for a simple task of mapping Gaussian α (leftmost yellow density oneach plot) to β (rightmost green density on each plot), for two init. gains: σ = 0.01, and σ = 1.5. A ResNetarchitecture of 5 blocks is trained on this UDT task. Evolution of the densities across the 5 layers are shown (2ndto 5th plot on each row) (light blue density). The displacement of each point of the empirical input distributionis plotted under the density. We also plot the optimal displacement of the density, w.r.t. Wasserstein 2 (blueoutlined curve on each plot).
Figure 9: Digit Swap Task.
Figure 10: Male to Female, and Back.
