Figure 1: Time-Frequency Tilings at a given time τ : (left)Short-Time  Fourier  Transform,  i.e.,  constant  bandwidth,(middle) Wavelet Transform, i.e., proportional bandwidth,(right) Learnable Group Transform, i.e, adaptive bandwidth,the ”tiling” is induced by the learned non-linear transforma-tion underlying the filter-bank decomposition.
Figure 2: Learnable Group Transform: (left) generating the strictly increasing continuous func-tions ρinc(g₍ₐk ,bk )) which stands for the strictly increasing and continuous transformation operatorwith parameters (ak, bk),   k       1, . . . , K  , where K denotes the number of filters in the filter-bank.  (middle) Each generated operators ρinc(g₍ₐk ,bk )) are applied to the mother filter denoted byψ (presently a Morlet wavelet), where the imaginary part is shown in red and the real part in blue.
Figure 3:  Transformation of a Morlet Wavelet:  For all the filters, the real part is shown in blueand the imaginary in red. (left) Morlet wavelet mother filter. (middle) Transformation of the motherfilter with respect to an affine transform:  the dilation parameter 0 < a < 1, i.e., contraction, andtranslation b = 0, i.e., no translation. (right) Increasing and continuous transformation of the motherfilter  for some randomly generated function g ∈ Cinc(R) leading to chirplet-like filter.
Figure 4: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample containing a bird song (cLGT),where (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. For each subfigure, the x-axis correspondsto time and the y-axis to the different filters. Notice that the y-axis usually corresponds to the scaleor the center-frequency of the filters. Other representations are displayed in Appendix (C.2.3). Wecan observe that compared to the initialization, the learned representation is sparser and the SNR isincreased. Besides, the representation is less redundant in the frequency axis.
Figure 5: Learnable Group Transform Filters for the Bird Detection Data - Each row displays twoselected filters (left and right sub-figure) for different settings:  (from top to bottom) LGT, nLGT,cLGT. For each subfigure, the left part corresponds to the filter before training and the right part tothe filter after training. The blue and red denote respectively the real and imaginary part of the filters.
Figure 6: Learnable Group Transform Filters for the Haptics Data - Each row displays two selectedfilters (left and right sub-figure) for different settings: (from top to bottom) LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 7: Artificial Dataset: (Top Left) Ascending Chirp, (Top Right) Descending Chirp, i.e. class 0,(Bottom Left) Ascending Chirp plus Gaussian noise, (Bottom Right) Descending Chirp plus Gaussiannoise, i.e., class 1. The samples contained in the training and testing set are higher in frequency andclose to the Nyquist frequency.
Figure 8:  Learnable Group Transform Filters for the Artificial Data - Each row displays twoselected filters (left and right sub-figure) for different settings:  (from top to bottom) LGT, nLGT,cLGT, cnLGT. For each subfigure, the left part corresponds to the filter before training and the rightpart to the filter after training. The blue and red denote respectively the real and imaginary part of thefilters.
Figure 9:  Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of an ascending chirp sample, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 10: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a descending chirp sample, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 11: Bird Detection Dataset - Sample containing a bird song. The red boxes are the locationsof the bird song.
Figure 12: Learnable Group Transform Filters for the Bird Detection Data - Each row displaystwo selected filters (left and right sub-figure) for different settings: (from top to bottom) LGT, nLGT,cLGT. For each subfigure, the left part corresponds to the filter before training and the right part tothe filter after training.
Figure 13: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample containing a bird song, wherefor each row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT.
Figure 14: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample without a bird song, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT.
Figure 15: Haptic Dataset - Sample of each class of the Haptic dataset.
Figure 16:  Learnable Group Transform Filters for the Haptics Data - Each row displays twoselected filters (left and right sub-figure) for different settings:  (from top to bottom) LGT, nLGT,cLGT, cnLGT. For each subfigure, the left part corresponds to the filter before training and the rightpart to the filter after training. The blue and red denote respectively the real and imaginary part of thefilters.
Figure 17: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample belonging to class 1, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 18: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of sample belonging to class 2, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 19: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of sample belonging to class 3, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 20: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample belonging to class 4, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
Figure 21: Learnable Group Transform - Visualisation of a sample belonging to class 5, where foreach row (left) at the initialization and (right) after learning. Each row displays a different setting:(from top to bottom): LGT, nLGT, cLGT, cnLGT.
