Figure 1: Examples of image manipulation using natural language descriptions. Current state-of-the-art methods only generate low-quality images, and fail to do manipulation on COCO. In contrast,our method allows the input images to be manipulated accurately corresponding to the given textdescriptions while preserving text-unrelated contents.
Figure 2: The architecture of the co-attention module and the generator used in the detail correctionmodule. In (b), CoA denotes the co-attention module.
Figure 3:  Ablation studies of the learned W and b.  The texts on the top are the given descriptionscontaining desired visual attributes, and the last three columns are the channel feature maps of W (v).
Figure 4: Text-image similarity, L₁ pixel difference, and manipulative precision values at differentepochs on the CUB (top) and COCO (bottom) datasets. We suggest to stop training the DCM modulewhen the model gets the highest MP values shown in the last column.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of three methods on the CUB birds dataset.
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison of three methods on the COCO dataset.
Figure 7:  Analysis of the co-attention module.  “Matched” represents the texts matching originalimages.  “Given” represents the texts provided by users.  “Concat.” denotes that instead of usingco-attention, hidden features are concatenated with image features along the channel direction.
Figure 8: Ablation studies.  a: given text describing the desired visual attributes; b: input image; c:removing the co-attention module and only concatenating image features and text features beforefeeding into the main module; d: using concatenation method to replace all co-attention modules; e:removing the main module and just training the DCM only; f: removing the DCM and just trainingthe main module only; g: our full model.
Figure 9: The architecture of the ManiGAN. The red dashed box indicates detail correction module,the CoA denotes the co-attention module.
Figure 10: Trend of the manipulation results over epoch increases on the COCO dataset.
Figure 11: Additional results between ManiGAN, SISGAN, and TAGAN on the CUB bird dataset.
Figure 12: Additional results between ManiGAN, SISGAN, and TAGAN on the CUB bird dataset.
Figure 13: Additional results between ManiGAN, SISGAN, and TAGAN on the COCO dataset.
Figure 14: Additional results between ManiGAN, SISGAN, and TAGAN on the COCO dataset.
