Figure 1: (a) Example of an mobile low-resolution image,which is utilized as the input of super resolution (SR) meth-ods. (b) Examples of super-resolution result via state-of-the-art method ESRGAN Wang et al. (2018b). (c) Examples ofSR result via the proposed method. (Best viewed in color.)The contributions of our work can be summarized into three categories. First, a general SR problemis explored which straightly face the mismatch between real mobile images and commonly utilizedtraining data. A H2L network is proposed to solve the problems effectively. Second, an end-to-endframework is proposed, which includes two parts, high-to-low network (H2L) and super-resolutionnetwork (L2H). During training, dual Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is utilized to optimizethe parameters.Third, a large-scale General Mobile Super Resolution dataset, GMSR, is generatedby high-to-low network. This dataset can support further research on the super resolution domain,and can be utilized either for training or as a fair benchmark.
Figure 2: Pipeline of the proposed SRDGAN framework, including ΦH2L and ΦL2H . The high-to-low network ΦH2L is proposed to generate realistic HR/LR image pairs. The low-to-high networkΦL2H is proposed to produce the super resolution image.
Figure 3: Training procedure of the proposed framework with dual GAN. (a) introduces the trainingprocess of ΦH2L, (b) is the training procedure of ΦL2H.
Figure 4: Subjective comparison between the proposed method and some state-of-the-art methods.
Figure 5: Comparing ESRGAN with the proposed methodPSNR and SSIM Wang et al. (2004) areutilized, where larger value represents better performance. The test was conducted on both generaldataset set14 and the mobile image dataset Set Ipair. It can be seen that the ‘ESRGAN*’ outperforms‘ESRGAN’ by changing training data. It proves that the new dataset(GMSR) and new trainingstrategy can be easily generalized to other model structures and improve the performance on bothgeneral data and mobile data. Moreover, ’Ours’ further improves the performance compared with‘ESRGAN*’. It proves the effectiveness of the model structure in ΦL2H.
