Figure 1: Part (a) describes our overall framework for valence and arousal tasks separately. Featuresfor multi-modal are extracted as detailed in part (b)3.1	Multi-modal FeaturesThe modal scope we could use for valence and arousal tasks in movie affective analysis is based onthe following observations. 1) The actors/Actress’ actions, dialogues, and facial expressions are thekey factors that affect the audience’s emotions. Scenes (such as environment, atmosphere) and back-ground music also implicitly deliver emotions to audiences. 2) Valence and Arousal emotional statesdepend on different modalities. For instance, Facial expressions are more related to the valence taskwhile actions are more related to the arousal task. The actors’ actions can affect the intensity of emo-tions while they are less related to the direction of emotions (Detenber & Reeves, 1996). Therefore,for the valence task, audio, scene and facial expression modalities are finally used. For the arousaltask, audio, scene, and action modalities are finally used. Related experiments in section 4.2.1 and4.2.2 also support our observations.
Figure 2: Residual-based progressive training strategy for intra-clip feature fusion of valenceStage 1: Modality-specific pre-trainingThe main role of this step is to obtain the importance of each modality and determine the trainingorder for each modality in the next stage. We append two fully connected layers for auxiliarytraining after the LSTMs of each modality to form the modality-specific model. Then we train eachmodality-specific model by minimizing the Mean Square Error (MSE) loss. The loss function canbe computed as follows:mL(y,G) = X m ||yj - Gj ||2	⑴j=1 mWhere yj is the prediction for clip j . Gj represents the ground truth for clip j . It is the mean oflabels for every second within the clip. m denotes the batch size.
Figure 3: Features extracted from movie clips in the test set by the modality-specific models. T-SNEis adopted for dimensionality reduction. The red points represent the features with label greater than0 and the blue points represent the features with label less than 0.
Figure 4: The predictions of movies in test set for the valence task. The left one is forMEDIAEVAL18_54; the right one is for MEDIAEVAL18_62.
Figure 5: The predictions of movies in the test set for the arousal task. The left one is forMEDIAEVAL18_60; The right one is for MEDIAEVAL18_63.
Figure 6: Bad cases in the test set. The left one is the valence predictions for MEDIAEVAL18 65from 3000s to 4000s; The right one is the arousal predictions for MEDIAEVAL18_60.
