Figure 1: Class-specific object boundary extraction: This work proposes a novel ConvNet architecture & atwo-stage training scheme for class-specific object boundary estimation. This is a sample result from the modelwhen applied for the problem of extracting road contours from aerial image tiles.
Figure 2: Supervisory signal preparation for Stage 1The objective function for this stage becomes;Co(θ) = - XXβZk(p)log Zk(p; θ) + (1- β)(1 - Zk(p))log(1 - Zk(p; θ)))	(4)Since we use a dilated version of GT in preparing Z, it also contains some non-object contour pixels.
Figure 3: High-frequency augmented contour detection architecture.
Figure 4: Evaluation results on ContourMNISTImplementation details: We have implemented all our methods using the PyTorCh maChine learn-ing framework. We used SGD optimizer with learning rate 1e - 4 for all experiments. Trainingexperiments are done using NVIDIA GTX-1080 GPU with 12GB RAM. For wavelets deComposi-tion, we used pytorCh-wavelets1 paCkage. All the models in this seCtion are trained for ten epoChs.
Figure 5: Evaluation results on Areal Image Road Contours dataset4.2 Results on Aerial Road Contours DatasetIn this section, we evaluate the models on a real-world aerial image dataset for the task of extractingroad contours.
Figure 6: Sample result on a tile from Parcel alignment dataset5	Application to Geo-parcel AlignmentIn this section, we discuss an application of the proposed model, CntrNet+CL (trained for road con-tour extraction), for aligning geo-parcel data with aerial image tiles. Geo-parcel data is generallyused to identify public and private land property boundaries for tax assessment processes. Parcelsare shapefiles in the records maintained by local counties and represent latitude-longitude GPS co-ordinates of the property boundaries. We project these parcel shapes (using perspective projection)onto a geo-tagged coordinate system of the camera with which aerial imagery was captured. Thisprocess results in binary contour images as shown in Figure 7c. These contours are ideally expectedto match visual property entities in the aerial image of the corresponding region (shown in Figure7a). However, due to several differences in their collection processes, these two modalities of thedata often misalign by a large extent, sometimes, in the order of 10 meters. Figure 7d depicts themisalignment of the original (before alignment) parcel contours overlaid on the aerial image in bluecolor. This misalignment might lead to wrong property assignments to individuals, thus, incorrecttax assessments. These data modalities of geographical data need to be aligned well before using itto assist the processes of property assignment and tax assessment.
Figure 7: Geo-parcel alignment with road evidences. Better see in enlarged version.
