Figure 1: Left/Center: Computational cost strongly depends on the hardware architecture on whichthe model is executed. Right: Proposed computational cost for analysis or theoretical research,assuming an ideal hardware architecture.
Figure 2: Training curves of ESN a (left) and validation accuracy (right) on CIFAR-10. In the rightgraph, moving average curve between 3-epochs is overlapped on each plot.
Figure 3:	Relation between validation accuracy and ESNα during training and after quantization.
Figure 4:	Accuracy versus ESNa(left) and ESNd (right) for various network depths and widths.
Figure 5:	Training curves for loss, ESNa, and number of pruned filters under different learning rate(LR) conditions. ESNa is calculated by Equations (4) and (5).
Figure 6:	Accuracy versus ESN。〃 (left/center) and histogram of the maximal bit width for eachfilter (right) in the pruning only, quantization only, and PrUne-then-quantize mixed cases.
Figure 7: Relation between random walk during SGD and quantization noise. Loss often steeplydecreases when LR is shifted by (e.g., 1/10). In this situation, loss before shifting LR is possiblygoverned by random walk noise due to the large LR, as shown in the left figure. When we quantizeweight parameters of the trained model, however, the loss or accuracy should be determined by noiseinduced by quantization, as shown in the right figure. If we can assume that the loss landscapes ofthe two cases should not diverge too much, the loss (or accuracy) after quantization is possiblypredicted by the dependency of loss (or accuracy) on ESNa during training.
Figure 8: (Left/center) top-1 accuracy on ImageNet versus ESN。〃 and (right) estimated ESNd,applying the PrUne-then-quantize method to (upper) ResNet-18 and (lower) ResNet-50.
Figure 9: Relation between validation accuracy versus ESNa during training and after quantization.
Figure 10: Comparison of ResNet-18 and ResNet-50 with respect to top-1 accuracy on ImageNetversus ESNa/d (left/right).
Figure 11: Comparison of other methods with respect to top-1 accuracy on ImageNet versus esti-mated ESN d.
