Figure 1: An image from the Visual Genome dataset showing several men sitting next to each otherand the corresponding generated depth map. Bright colors indicate a larger distance to the camera.
Figure 2: We propose utilizing 3D information in visual relation detection by synthetically generatingdepth maps using an RGB-to-Depth model incorporated within relation detection frameworks. Onthe left side, we see the RGB image and its depth map. We use separate CNNs to extract featuremaps from both modalities and create pairwise feature vectors dso (pooled from depth feature maps),lso (from bounding boxes), c0so (from class labels) and vso (from the pooled visual features). Thesevectors are then concatenated and fed into a relation detection layer to infer the predicate.
Figure 3: Using depth maps improves the understanding of perspective and increases the generaldetection rate of relations such as behind (e.g. right image). However, in some cases such as in theleft image, after including depth maps, (bushes, behind, bench) has been mislabelled. One shouldnote that here the bushes (left corner of the image) have similar depth values as the benches. Equaldepth values can be a strong indicator of the predicate next to rather than behind. In this case, thehuman point of view seems to have caused a labelling error recovered by the depth-based model.
Figure 4: This plot shows the prediction changes per predicate, going from Ours-v to Ours-v, d. Theclasses with zero changes are omitted from the plot. The darker shades indicate larger number of thatclass within the test set whereas the lighter shades are under-represented classes. An improvementin predicates with more frequency has a larger effect on the Micro R@K whereas this effect iseliminated within Macro R@K. We can see that indeed the improvements by using depth maps aremostly happening within the less-represented classes.
Figure 5: Examples of high quality depth maps generated from visual genome images.
Figure 6: Examples of low quality depth maps generated from visual genome images.
