Figure 1: A color view of the weight function in a three class classification problem. For the samples whichare classified as class y = k and for the samples that y = k but located near to the decision boundary, the*Wk (x, w ) = 1 which is shown with darker hue. For the samples that y = k and are far from the decisionboundary Wk (x, w*) → 0, which is with lighter hue. The decision boundary is illustrated by the black line.
Figure 2: Results show accuracy and Brier Score] in different degree of shifting for MNIST and CIFAR10datasets. Comparing TS and TS-Target results shows TS-Target is more robust to domain shift than TS. UTSwith small gap is following TS-Target that is the labeled version of UTS and can be considered as the ground-truth for it. The pre-trained models are trained on MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets and tested on different degreeof shifted MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets to model domain shift.
Figure 3: Comparison between different post-processing and probabilistic approaches under domain shift. Theresults are reported for Brier Score] vs Accuracy. TS-Target has the most calibrated output comparing to theother probabilistic approaches. UTS after TS-Target achieves the best results which shows comparing to theother probabilistic approaches, it is robust to the domain shift. The models are trained on MNIST and CIFAR10later during the test different degrees of shifts applied on them to make the domain shifttruth for UTS when the labels are available. Later, we also evaluate the robustness of UTS, whichwas specifically designed to domain shift, and several probabilistic approaches, which only considerthe case of calibration for the same distribution setting. The goal of the experiment is to show thatUTS can be indeed robust for different shifting domain scenarios.
Figure 4: Sensitivity of TS approach to the labeling noise. Even with small percentage of noise in the labels ofsamples TS cannot calibrate the model. UTS is completely robust to the labeling noise as it is an unsupervisedapproach. Shaded regions represent std over 20 runs.
Figure 5: Robustness of UTS to domain shift problem in compare to TS, Ts-Target and uncalibrated methods.
Figure 6: Sensitivity of TS method to the labeling noise in calibration set in compare to UTS and uncalibratedmethods. UTS is not sensitive to the labeling noise in calibration sets at all as it is an unsupervised approach.
Figure 7: Comparing the stability of different TS family approaches to the number of calibration samples. TS-Target has the best stability. However UTS converges quickly to the optimal solution. Consider that collectingsamples for UTS comparing to TS-Target is much less expensive task as it does not need labeled samples. Thenumber of samples in calibration set C from top row to the bottom is 30, 50, 500, 1000, and 2000.
