Figure 1: The overall sharing mechanisms of multilinear relationship network (MRN), two variants of deepmulti-task representation learning (DMTRL) for CNN setting and our TRMTL (general setting and CNN set-ting) w.r.t. two tasks. The shared portion is depicted in yellow. MRN: original weights are totally shared at thelower layers and the relatedness between tasks at the top layers is modelled by tensor normal priors. DMTRL(TT or Tucker): all layer-wise weights must be equal-shape so as to be stacked and decomposed into factors.
Figure 2: The diagrams of a 4th-order tensor in TT and TR-format.
Figure 3: Validation test w.r.t sharing patterns and‘C’. The averaged accuracy of two tasks involvedwith 50 samples. The training samples for task Avs task B are ‘1800 vs 50’ and ‘50 vs 1800’.
Figure 4: Results of accuracy changes of task A,B, D and E, when the faction of the data for train-ing for task C is increased from 10% to 90%. ‘+’corresponds to the results after the samples augmen-tation of task C. 10% data for training for task A,B, D and E. The best pattern of TRMTL is ‘432’.
Figure 5: Left two figures: Performance comparison on Home-Office datasets with different fractions of train-ing data. Right two figures: Performance comparison on Adience-CelebA datasets. In all figures, TRMTL-HTand TRMTL-HM correspond to the heterogeneous architectures and homogeneous architectures, respectively.
Figure 6: The demonstration of four types generalizations from DMTRL-TT to our TRMTL.
Figure 7: The results of accuracy changes of task A, B, D and E, when the faction of the data for training fortask C is increased from 10% to 90%. ‘+’ corresponds to the results after the samples augmentation of taskC. 50% data for training for task A, B, D and E. The best sharing pattern of TRMTL is ‘432’.
Figure 8: Performance comparison of MRN, DMTRL-Tucker, DMTRL-TT and our TRMTL-4431 on CIFAR-10 with different fractions of training data. Top row: 100% data for two of the three tasks, and show theaccuracy for the other one task (in solid lines) as well as the averaged accuracy of all three tasks (in dottedlines). Bottom row: 100% data for one of the three tasks, and show the accuracies for the other two tasks (indashed and solid lines).
