Figure 1: Each plot shows the fractional assignment of a new ad to the three different advertisers indexed{0, 1, 2} while keeping the remaining budget equal across all advertisers. The x-axis shows the bid of the firstadvertiser and the y-axis shows the algorithm agent’s fractional assignment p.
Figure 2: Each plot shows the trained agent’s allocation of a new ad to three different advertisers indexed{0, 1, 2}. The ad has a common bid of 1 from all advertisers. In the ith plot (i ∈ {0, 1, 2}) the x-axis denotesthe budget of advertiser i, while other advertisers have a common remaining budget. The y-axis shows thealgorithm agent’s fractional assignment p.
Figure 3: The plot shows the trained agent’s allocation of a new ad with bids (x, 0.5, 0), where x is the valueon the x-axis and y-axis denotes the fractional assignment p. All advertisers have a common budget of 1. Thedotted (red) curve depicts the approximate behavior of the optimal algorithm for bidder 0.
Figure 4: The learnt algorithm instantiated at various (B, N) values as CDF of buying over time (blue curve).
Figure 5: Competitive ratio at snapshots taken just before the adversarial network is restarted. The x-axisrepresents the snapshot number and the y-axis shows the competitive ratios. The blue (adv) line represents theCR of the fully trained adversarial network before its restart. The orange (exp) line at snapshot i represents theCR of the best response from the experience array at snapshot i versus the trained algorithm at snapshot i. Thegreen (alg) line at snapshot i represents the CR of the best response from the entire experience array (from theentire training) versus the trained algorithm at snapshot i.
Figure 6: Each plot shows the fractional assignment of a new ad to the three different advertisers indexed{0, 1, 2} while keeping the remaining budget equal across all advertisers. The bids of the incoming ad slot are(x, c, 0), where x changes along the x-axis and c is common for every plot in the same column. The y-axisshows the fractional assignments p. Each row of plots features advertisers with a common remaining budget.
Figure 7: Each plot shows the fractional assignment of a new adword to the three different advertisers indexed{0, 1, 2}. The ad slot has a common bid of 1 to all advertisers. The remaining budgets change for one advertiseralong the x axis while staying the same for all other advertisers. The y-axis denotes the fractional assignmentp.
Figure 8: A set of random samples from the experience array after training. The jth row and ith columnrepresent the bid of advertiser i for ad slot j . Darker color represents a bid close to 0, while brighter colorrepresents a bid close to 1.
