Figure 1: Changing the azimuth of chairs in CGAN and CZ-GEM while holding Z constant. UnlikeCZ-GEM, C and Z are clearly entangled in CGAN as changing C also changes the type of chair eventhough Z is held constant.
Figure 2: On the left, a conditional GAN (CGAN) model. CZ-GEM in the middle replaces node Cwith a subgraph (C → Y ) that is trained independently of the rest of the model. This subgraph learnsto only partially render the observation. As such, Z comes at a later stage of the rendering pipeline toadd details to Y . As an example, consider the rightmost graph where the observation is made up ofdifferent types of chairs in different poses. Let the pose be controlled by C and the type (Identity) beexplained by Z. Then in step one of CZ-GEM we learn the pose relationship between C and X viathe subgraph, giving rise to a blurry chair in the correct pose. Once the pose is learned, in the secondstep, the approximate rendering Y is transformed into X by allowing Z to add identity related detailsto the blurry image.
Figure 3: Schematic for cz-GEM(2-6 dimensions) can be used within CZ-GEM to discover C in an unsupervised fashion withoutcompromising on generation quality.
Figure 4: Latent traversal on cars and chairs. Third rows in CZ-GEM results show Y .
Figure 5: Latent traversal on faces (unsupervised cz-GeM). The three latent variables capture therotation, azimuth, and distance respectively.
Figure 6: Latent traversal of InfoGAN on faces. The latent variables are able to capture some posechanges but the pose changes are highly entangled with other pose factors as well as the face shape.
Figure 7: Latent traversal on CelebA (unsupervised cz-GeM). The latent variables consistentlycapture the azimuth, hair-style, gender and hair color respectively while maintaining good imagequality.
Figure 8: Latent traversal of cz-GeM on faces. The pose variations are azimuth, horizontal translation,vertical translation, distance, rotation, and elevation from top to bottom. The shape variations showthe difference in face height, forehead, jaw, and ear from top to bottom.
Figure 9: Latent traversal of CGAN on faces. The pose variations are azimuth, horizontal translation,vertical translation, distance, rotation, and elevation from top to bottom. The shape variations showthe difference in face height, forehead, jaw, and ear from top to bottom.
Figure 10: Zoomed-in comparison on face shape. Row 1: CGAN forehead variation; Row 2: CGANjaw variation; Row 3: cz-GeM forehead variation; Row 4: cz-GeM jaw variation. Row 1 and Row3 should have a bigger forehead from left to right while Row 2 and Row 4 should have a consistentforehead. CGAN and cz-GeM shows good forehead variation in Row 1 and Row 3 respectively butcz-GeM (Row 4) does better than CGAN (Row 2) in keeping the forehead the same while anotherfactor is changing.
Figure 11: Latent traversal on chairs. The first three rows show the effect of the variable in C thatcontrols the rotation of chairs. The last row visualize the corresponding Y .
Figure 12: Latent traversal on chairs (unsupervised cz-GeM).
Figure 13: Latent traversal of unsupervised cz-GeM on cars.
Figure 14: Latent traversal of InfoGAN on faces dataset.
Figure 15: Latent traversal of unsupervised cz-GeM on face dataset.
