Figure 1: These images contain different representations of the same information. However, one ofthe two is much easier for us to understand. We posit that, for our nervous system, one of the twoimages has a higher observed mutual information for the task of recognizing the person.
Figure 2: Performance of the RGB, YCbCr, Block DCT, PREC (blue, orange, green, red) on thedatasets. From left to right: KDEF, Groceries, Lane Following, Drone Racing. DCT was omittedFigure 3: Performance of representations on the datasets. From left to right: KDEF, Groceries, LaneFollowing, Drone RacingMoreover, we observe the great importance of hyperparameters in the spread of results for each net-work architecture. Had we chosen to hand-tune our parameters and accidentally picked a very poorperforming network for the RGB representation we could have easily come to the conclusion thatDCT achieves better results on all datasets. As we predicted, the performance of a representationsalso depends greatly on the network architecture. This is especially visible for the lane followingdataset. We can see that, surprisingly, dense networks are among the best for both RGB and YCbCr,while they fall far behind on all other representations.
Figure 3: Performance of representations on the datasets. From left to right: KDEF, Groceries, LaneFollowing, Drone RacingMoreover, we observe the great importance of hyperparameters in the spread of results for each net-work architecture. Had we chosen to hand-tune our parameters and accidentally picked a very poorperforming network for the RGB representation we could have easily come to the conclusion thatDCT achieves better results on all datasets. As we predicted, the performance of a representationsalso depends greatly on the network architecture. This is especially visible for the lane followingdataset. We can see that, surprisingly, dense networks are among the best for both RGB and YCbCr,while they fall far behind on all other representations.
Figure 4: Image from the Groceries dataset in various representations. From left to right: RGB,YCBCR, PREC, DCT, blockwise DCT (cropped to show relevant coefficients, contrast boosted).
Figure 5: Samples from each of the datasets. From left to right: Lane Following, KDEF, Groceriesand Drone Racing.
