Figure 1: A histogram of predictions from Mdeterministic RNN models trained with differ-ent random seeds for a given ICU patient’s mor-tality probability. As shown here, model un-certainty can cause a high-variance predictivedistribution across individual models in an en-semble. This is not captured when using a sin-gle model or an average over an ensemble.
Figure 2: A plot of the mean versus standarddeviation of the predictive uncertainty distribu-tions of the deterministic ensemble for positiveand negative patients in the validation set. Wefind that the standard deviations do not form asimple linear relationship with the mean. Forreference, we note that the variances of thedistributions are generally lower than that ofa Bernoulli distribution’s variance curve.
Figure 3: Left two: The deterministic ensemble produces different mortality prediction distributions(i.e. model uncertainty) for two different patients from the validation set. Right two: The corre-sponding optimal decision distributions, “True” being the positive prediction for mortality and “False”being the opposite. For some patients the ensemble is relatively certain about the optimal decision,while for other patients there is a large amount of uncertainty.
Figure 4: Predictive uncertainty distributions of both the RNN with Bayesian embeddings and thedeterministic RNN ensemble for individual patients. We find that the Bayesian model is qualitativelyable to capture model uncertainty that is quite similar to that of the ensemble with considerablysmaller number of parametersof a single model (7.22 million parameters in the MIMIC-III Bayesian Embeddings RNN), versus Mmodels in the deterministic ensemble (200 × 6.16 million parameters), as well as only requiring thesingle model at prediction time, using Bayesian RNNs can be a more efficient approach.
Figure 5: Left: Model performance comparison on male vs. female patients. Each point representsstratified AUC-PR for a single model from the deterministic ensemble. Correlation coefficientr = -0.442. Right: Summary of uncertainty measures within each age subgroup, using theBayesian embeddings RNN. On all measures, uncertainty increases monotonically with age. Thiscorresponds to an increase in mortality rate with age, as positive cases are more uncertain on average.
