Figure 1: Architecture of AnoDM implemented by β-VAE and t-SNE for anomaly detection. First, β-VAE islearned using normal training data (upper part of the framework). Then it is employed by the anomaly detector(lower part of the framework) to efficiently obtain latent encodings of training samples (or a representativesubset from the training set) and test samples, and corresponding reconstructed versions using the decoder.
Figure 2: Performances (measured in terms of auROC) of AnoDM evaluated on five datasets: MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, Small-Norb, CIFAR-10 and Arrhythmia. On each dataset, the anomalous class is indicated in thecorresponding subcaption while treating the rest classes as normal classes. Note that β = 0 doesn’t work forCIFAR10 and Arrhythmia, because it makes learning highly unstable. As displayed in (d) and (e), missingvalues were indicated in white color at the top of corresponding heatmaps for β = 0.
Figure 3: The impact of β’s value to t-SNE map of latent representations OfMNIST samples. Class 7 is treatedas anomalous class data. Each map displays 10000 data points identical in all maps including 5000 trainingdata points and 5000 test data points.
Figure 4: ROC curves of four methods on Fashion-MNIST. These four examples illustrate the results of usingfour different anomaly score functions: t-SNE+Recon-error-based (SβVAE+tSNE = αDRE + (1 - α)DtkSNE), t-SNE-based (DtkSNE), Reconstruction-error-based (DRE) and latent-distance-based (calculating distances in latentspace of β-VAE). The α values for these four plots are 0.8, 0.8, 0.95, and 0.8, respectively.
Figure 5: AuROCs on Arrhythmia.
Figure 6: Reconstructed signals, t-SNE map, and ROC curves on Arrhythmia with class “Q” as anomaly.
Figure 7: Architecture of the temporal convolutional network (TCN).
Figure 8: Performances (measured in terms of auROC) of AnoDM evaluated on Fashion-MNIST and Arrhyth-mia when using normalized k-NN distance in t-SNE maps in combination with reconstruction error. On eachdataset, the anomalous class is indicated in the corresponding subcaption while treating the rest classes asnormal classes.
Figure 9: Comparison of "-based method or Z-based method on MNIST data (anomalous class is 3) forinferring latent representations that are visualized in t-SNE map.
Figure 10: Comparison of μ-based method or Z-based method on Fashion-MNIST data (anomalous class is 1(“Trouser/pants”)) for inferring latent representations that are visualized in t-SNE space.
Figure 11: Comparison of μ-based method or Z-based method on Arrhythmia time-series data (anomalousclass is 4 (“Q”)) for inferring latent representations that are visualized in t-SNE space.
Figure 12: ROC plots on MNIST (μ-based).
Figure 13: ROC plots on FaShion-MNIST (μ-based).
Figure 14: AUROC plots on CIFAR-10 (μ-based).
Figure 15: ROC plots on Small-Norb (μ-based).
Figure 16: ROC plots of Arrhythmia using CNN-encoder (μ-based).
Figure 17: ROC plots of Arrhythmia using LSTM-encoder (μ-based).
Figure 18: ROC plots of ECG using TCN-encoder (μ-based).
