Figure 1: Symbolic image illustrating uncertainty realism. The estimated uncertainties(contour lines) are too broad (left), realistic (middle), too narrow (right) compared to thedeviations of model outputs (black crosses) from ground truth (red circle).
Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed variational FRRN (at inference). The two uncertaintymechanisms latent space sampling and MC dropout are highlighted in red.
Figure 3: Assessment of uncertainty realism for the regression task. Left: empirical dis-tributions Msample and Mgt , middle: rescaled Msample to match the variance of Mgt ,right: distribution of angles α enclosed by the error direction and the covariance ellipsoidorientation.
Figure 4: Uncertainty scores and estimation errors (left: covariance determinant, right:largest covariance element).
Figure 5: Segmentations and uncertainty maps produced by variational FRRN. Segmentations:ground truth (top left), FRRN with CVAE sampling (top middle), FRRN with MC dropout(top right). Uncertainty maps: FFRN + CVAE sampling (bottom left), FRRN + MCdropout (bottom right). Uncertainties of correctly classified pixels are shown in green, ofmisclassified pixels in red.
Figure 6: In-sample and out-of-sample comparison of different uncertainty mechanisms. a)and b) show in-sample and out-of-sample ROC curves, c) and d) the equivalent precision-recallcurves. Class entropy is used as uncertainty score.
Figure 7: Uncertainty of correct and false classified pixels. Upper row: The flipped inputimage, overlayed with the Ground truth segmentation as well as the predictions based on thevariational FRRN and MC dropout (50 samples each). The lower row shows the normalized,pixelwise uncertainty of correctly classified pixels (green) and misclassified pixels (red). Grayregions are not included in training and evaluation.
Figure 8: Rejection rates of FN and TP predictions with high uncertainty. The threshold isbased on the ROC curve and the entropy score. Left: Rejections on in-data samples, right:on out-of-data samples.
Figure 9: Assessment of uncertainty realism for the regression task. Distributions of scaledMC-dropout samples and estimation errors in x-direction (top left), y-direction (top right),for width (bottom left) and height (bottom right).
