Figure 1: Cheese holes distribution. (a) The outer square is the support of the underlying truedistribution PX,Y , but the sampling is restricted on the small squares X × Y with distribution PX,Y .
Figure 2: The natural and robust accuracies of our models for the varying parameter c.
Figure 3: The prediction margins at convergence of capacity 5 on the test set. The natural margin ofa model f at (x, y) is logpf,y (x) - maxyθ=y logpfy (x). The adversarial margin is calculated bylogPf,y (Xp) - maxyo=y logpf,yo (Xp), where Xp is a full PGD attack.
Figure 4: An abstraction of the sensible adversarial loss when c ≥ 0.5. When x is in the sensiblyreversed stage for a current model f, the loss of Xs is approximately log C. Although the lossis approximately the same while x stays in this stage, the model updates in a way to pushes thesensible adversarial example to become a full PGD attack as the arrow.
Figure 5:	The prediction margins at convergence of the models in Experiment 1 on the test set.
Figure 6:	The prediction margins at convergence of the models in Experiment 1 on the test set.
Figure 7: Another visualization of Figure 2. The name of each panel denotes the hyperparameter c.
Figure 8: Adversarial and natural prediction margins on CIFAR10 of the SENSE and TRADEmodel. The margins are calculated by M(f,χ,y) = logPy(x) - maxyo=y logpy，(x) = Sy(x)-maxy06=y sy0 (x), where s denote a score function of f, i.e., the output of the neural network.
Figure 9: Cheese holes distribution. (e) and (f) The natural and robust risk when p = 0.55. Theblack, blue, and red colors are the worst cases of naturally, adversarially, and sensibly robust func-tions. (g) The robustly optimal model when > 0.25. (h) The sensibly robust model when > 1/12.
Figure 10: The convergence check for the PGD attacks on the MNIST model. We used a step size0.01. We can see that K = 500 is enough to achieve the lowest point by counting the worst case ofrandom restarts.
Figure 11: The convergence check for the PGD attacks on the CIFAR model. We used a step size0.01 and for CIFAR, 2/255. We can see that K = 100 is enough to achieve the lowest point bycounting the worst case of random restarts.
