Figure 1: Schematic of LAAF-PINN for the Burgers equation. The left NN is the uninformednetwork while the right one induced by the governing equation is the informed network. The twoNNs share hyper-parameters and they both contribute to the loss function.
Figure 2:	Discontinuous function: Neural network solution using standard fixed activation (firstrow), GAAF (second row), L-LAAF without (third row) and with (fourth row) slope recovery term,and N-LAAF without (fifth row) and with (sixth row) slope recovery term using the tanh activation.
Figure 3:	DiScontinuouS function: compariSon of variation of na for GAAF (top row), L-LAAFwithout (Second row, left) and with (Second row, right) Slope recovery term, and N-LAAF without(third row, left) and with (third row, right) Slope recovery term uSing tanh activation. In caSe ofN-LAAF, the mean value of naik along with itS Standard deviation (Std) are plotted for each hidden-layer.
Figure 4: CompariSon of loSS function for Standard fixed activation, GAAF, L-LAAF and N-LAAFwithout (left) and with (right) Slope recovery term uSing Scaling factor n = 10.
Figure 5:	Training loss in log scale versus epoch without data augmentation.
Figure 6:	Training loss in log scale versus epoch with data augmentation.
Figure 7: Comparison of solution of the Burgers equation in frequency domain using standard fixedactivation (first row), GAAF (second row), L-LAAF without (third row) and with (fourth row) sloperecovery term, N-LAAF without (fifth row) and with (sixth row) slope recovery term using n =10. Columns (left to right) represent the solution in frequency domain at t = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75,respectively.
Figure 8: Comparison of solution of the Burgers equation after 2000 iteration using standard fixedactivation (first row), GAAF (second row), L-LAAF with slope recovery term (third row), and N-LAAF with slope recovery term (fourth row) using n = 10. Columns (left to right) represent thesolution t = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75, respectively.
Figure 9: Comparison of loss function for standard fixed, GAAF, L-LAAF and N-LAAF withoutslope recovery term (left) and L-LAAF and N-LAAF with slope recovery term (right).
Figure 10: Burgers equation: comparison of nak for L-LAAF for all six hidden-layers. First threecolumns represent results for L-LAAF without slope recovery term whereas the last three columnsare with slope recovery term. In all simulations, the scaling factor n is 10.
Figure 11: Burgers equation: comparison of mean and standard deviation of naik for N-LAAF forall six hidden-layers. First three columns represent resuls for N-LAAF without the slope recoveryterm whereas the last three columns are with slope recovery term. In all simulations, the scalingfactor n is 10.
