Figure 1: A diagram of instabil-ity analysis (text left).
Figure 2: The train and test error when linearly interpolating between the minima found by randomlyinitializing a network and training it twice under different data orders. Each line is the mean andstandard deviation across three initializations and three data orders (nine samples in total). Theerrors of the trained networks are at interpolation = 0 and 1. Inception train data is progress.
Figure 3:	The instability when linearly interpolating between the minima found by networks thatare trained on different data orders from step k. Each line is the mean and standard deviation acrossthree initializations and three data orders (nine samples in total). Inception train data is progress.
Figure 4:	Test instability throughout training. At each epoch, linearly interpolate between the statesof two networks trained with different SGD noise and compute instability. Each line involves train-ing to iteration k and then training two copies on different data orders after.
Figure 5:	Test accuracy of IMP subnetworks, randomly pruned subnetworks, and randomly reini-tialized IMP subnetworks at all levels of sparsity. The black line is the accuracy of the unprunednetwork. Each line is the mean and standard deviation across three initializations.
Figure 6:	The test error when linearly interpolating between the minima found by training sparsesubnetworks twice from initialization under different data orders. Each line is the mean and standarddeviation across three initializations and three data orders (nine samples in total). The test errors ofthe trained networks are at 0 and 1. Percents are percents of weights remaining.
Figure 7:	The instability of subnetworks that are created from the state of the full network at iterationk and trained on different data orders from there. Each line is the mean and standard deviation acrossthree initializations and three data orders (nine samples in total). The gray lines are the accuraciesof the full networks to one standard deviation. Percents are percents of weights remaining.
Figure 8: At all sparsity levels, the maximum test accuracy achieved by IMP subnetworks for anyrewinding iteration (red). Also includes the test accuracy of IMP subnetworks with k = 0, randomlypruned subnetworks, and randomly reinitialized IMP subnetworks with k = 0 at all levels of sparsity.
