Figure 1: Training Plots of our TPRU with different number of role vectors. (The plottedmodels are trained without dropout layers.) In general, our proposed recurrent unit converges fasterand leads to better results on both tasks when more role vectors are available, but the total numberof parameters remains the same. (Best viewed in colour.)Interestingly, on the Logical Entailment task, the performance of our proposed TPRU with onlyeight role vectors matches that of a GRU with the same dimensionality. The number of role vectorsrequired in our TPRU to approximately match the performance of a GRU and an LSTM on theMNLI task is much less than the dimension of the hidden states, which suggests that the distributedvector representations learnt in both the LSTM and GRU are highly redundant and can be reducedto fewer dimensions; this also implies that the LSTM and GRU are not able to extensively exploitthe representation space even when the dimensionality of the model is larger than that required forsolving the task. Meanwhile, our proposed TPRU explores sparse weighted combinations of rolevectors in Eq. 4, and it helps the model to specialise individual role vectors for different purposes,which eventually leads to a more effective exploitation of the representation space.
Figure 2: Training Plots for comparing the single- and eight-slice dot-product operations ofour TPRU, with both plain and BiDAF architectures. (The plotted models are trained withoutdropout layers.) Overall, the eight-slice dot product, which enhances the fillers from one- to eight-dimensional vectors, leads to faster convergence rate and better performance on the training setwhen the number of role vectors is limited, and its effect diminishes when the number of role vectorsreaches a large value. ‘4’ and ‘4 M’ respectively refer to our TPRU with four role vectors and single-or eight-slice dot-products. (Best viewed in colour.)2.	well Uh normally i like to to go out fishing in a boat and Uh rather than like bank fishingand just like you try and catch anything that's swimming because i 've had such problemsof trying to catch any type of fish that uh i just really enjoy doing the boat type fishing .
