Figure 1:	BPDs of (affine) Glow and PixelCNN on MNIST test set with 1-pixel and 2-pixel lefttranslation. Shown are class labels from 0 to 4. See Supp. B.1 for additional results.
Figure 2:	Examples from MNIST, FashionMNIST test sets with 1-pixel and 2-pixel left translations.
Figure 3: Examples from MNIST, FashionMNIST test sets perturbed with gaissian noises. The mid-dle column shows the original images. The second and fourth columns are the gaussian noises andmasked gaussian noises. The first and fifth columns are the perturbed images with noises w/o (+/-)masks. Below the samples are the BPDs reported by Affine Glow and PixelCNN. Test images arescaled to [0, 1]. We could simply generate mask by setting a threshold for the scaled pixels. Herewe use m = x < 0.3. See Supp. D for more examples.
Figure 4: BPDs of affine and additive Glow on MNIST, FashionMNIST test sets by zeroing thepreceding 1 (zero z≤1) and 2 (zero z≤2) latent factors. Shown are classes 0 to 4. See Supp. C foradditional results.
Figure 5: Examples of Affine Glow with different zeroed latent variables on MNIST (left) andFashionMNIST (right) test sets. See Supp. C.1 for results of Additive Glow.
Figure 6: BPDs of (affine) Glow and PixelCNN on MNIST, FashionMNIST test sets with different1-pixel and 2-pixel left translation (1p-left, 2p-left). Shown are classes from 5-9.
Figure 7: BPDs of (additive) Glow on MNIST and FashionMNIST test sets with different 1-pixeland 2-pixel left translation (1p-left, 2p-left).
Figure 8: BPDs of affine and additive Glow on MNIST, FashionMNIST test sets by zeroing thepreceding 1 (zero <=1) and 2 (zero <=2) latent factors.
Figure 9: Examples of Additive Glow with different zeroed latent variables on MNIST (left) andFashionMNIST (right) test sets.
Figure 10: Examples from MNIST test sets perturbed with gaissian noises. The middle columnshows the original images. The second and fourth columns are the gaussian noises and maskedgaussian noises. The first and fifth columns are the perturbed images with noises w/o (+/-) masks.
Figure 11: Examples from FashionMNIST test sets perturbed with gaissian noises. The middlecolumn shows the original images. The second and fourth columns are the gaussian noises andmasked gaussian noises. The first and fifth columns are the perturbed images with noises w/o (+/-)masks. Below the samples are the BPDs reported by Affine Glow and PixelCNN.
