Figure 1: An episode of the putting task, seen from above (left) and from the agent’s perspec-tive (right). In each episode of training or evaluation, there are three randomly-coloured moveableobjects, plus a pink bed and a white tray. Initial positions of all objects, doors, windows and theagent are random. To succeed in an evaluation trial, the agent must process an instruction given bya human (e.g. ”Put the musical keyboard on the bed”, or ”Drop A Casio on the bed”), identify theintended object of reference, move towards it and lift it, rotating if necessary, and then lower it intothe specified location. Our best-performing agent succeeds at this evaluation with 72% accuracy.
Figure 2: Self-attention layers learn to pull-apart bothtraining nouns and their synonyms as the agent learnsthe putting task with synthetic environment language.
Figure 3: Lifting task, synonym evaluation. Left: accuracy of different agents over 1,000 episodeswhen no change is made to the environment template instruction. Right: accuracy of different agentswhen a synonym is introduced. Dotted line indicates score of an agent that carries out the correctbehaviour but with random objects from the room.
Figure 4: Lifting task, natural referring expression evaluation. Performance of agents on 1,000evaluation episodes when part of the environment template lifting instruction is replaced by a naturalreferring expression from human annotators. Dotted line indicates score of an agent that carries outthe correct behaviour but with random objects from the room.
Figure 5: Putting task, synonym evaluation. Performance of agents on 1,000 evaluation episodeswhen (left) no change is made to the template environment instruction and (rightmost three) differentparts of the template environment instruction are replaced with synonyms. Dotted line indicatesscore of an agent that carries out the correct behaviour but with random objects from the room.
Figure 6: Putting task, natural instruction evaluation. Performance of agents on 1,000 evaluationepisodes when the full environment template putting instruction is replaced by a natural instructionfrom human annotators. Dotted line indicates score of an agent that carries out the correct behaviourbut with random objects from the room.
