Figure 1: Diagram of our model architecture, showing how parameters for actors and critics are shared. iindexes agents, while j indexes reward types.
Figure 2: (Left) Rendering of our gridworld domain. Agents start each episode in the central room and mustcomplete various tasks related to collecting the yellow treasures placed around the map. (Center) Top-Downview of VizDoom ”My Way Home” map, modified for multi-agent experiments (Right) Egocentric view inVizDoom used for agents’ observationsat each step, so they are motivated to complete the task as quickly as possible. The only positiveextrinsic reward comes from any agent collecting a treasure that is allowed by the specific task, andrewards are shared between all agents. The optimal strategy in task 1 is for agents to spread outand explore separate portions of the map, while in task 2 they should explore the same areas, andin task 3 they should explore independently.
Figure 3: (Left) Mean number of trasures found per episode on TASK 1 with 2 agents in the gridworld domain.
Figure 4: Results on Task 1 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 5:	Results on Task 1 in Gridworld with 3 agents.
Figure 6:	Results on Task 1 in Gridworld with 4 agents.
Figure 7:	Results on Task 2 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 8:	Results on Task 2 in Gridworld with 3 agents.
Figure 9: Results on Task 2 in Gridworld with 4 agents.
Figure 10:	Results on Task 3 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 11:	Results on Task 3 in Gridworld with 3 agents.
Figure 12:	Results on Task 3 in Gridworld with 4 agents.
Figure 13:	Results on Task 1 in Vizdoom.
Figure 14: Results on Task 2 in Vizdoom.
Figure 15: Results on Task 3 in Vizdoom.
Figure 16: Ablations on Task 1 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 17: Ablations on Task 2 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 18: Ablations on Task 3 in Gridworld with 2 agents.
Figure 19: Two runs of our method on GridWorld Task 3 with 2 agents. Top row shows the evolution of themeta-policy’s probability of selecting each policy head. Bottom row shows the number of treasures found perepisode.
