Figure 1: Contour plots of the l1,2 norm (5) at 4 different scales with fixed noise σ = 1.
Figure 2: Experiments on distributed signSGD with majority vote using Rosenbrock function. Plotsshow function values with respect to iterations averaged over 10 repetitions. Left plot used constantstep size γ = 0.02, right plot used variable step size with γ0 = 0.02. We set mini-batch size 1 andused the same initial point. Dashed blue lines show the minimum value.
Figure 3: Comparison of signSGD and SGD on MNIST dataset with a fixed budget of gradientcommunication (MB) using single hidden layer FNN. For each batch size, we first tune the constantstep size over logarithmic scale {10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001} and then fine tune it. Clearly, signSGD beatsSGD if we compare their accuracies against communication. As suggested by the theory (see Lemma3) bigger mini-batch size increases the success probabilities ρi and thus improves the convergence.
Figure 4: Performance of signSGD with constant step size (γ = 0.25) under four different noiselevels (mini-batch size 1, 2, 5, 8) using Rosenbrock function. Each column represent a separateexperiment with function values, evolution of minimum success probabilities and the histogramof success probabilities throughout the iteration process. Dashed blue line in the first row is theminimum value. Dashed red lines in second and third rows are thresholds 1/2 of success probabilities.
Figure 5: Performance of signSGD with variable step size (γ0 = 0.25) under four different noiselevels (mini-batch size 1, 2, 5, 7) using Rosenbrock function. As in the experiments of Figure 4 withconstant step size, these plots show the relationship between success probabilities and the convergencerate (6). In low success probability regime (first and second columns) we observe oscillations, whilein high success probability regime (third and forth columns) oscillations are mitigated substantially.
Figure 6: In this part of experiments we investigated convergence rate (7) to a neighborhood of thesolution. We fixed gradient noise level by setting mini-batch size 2 and altered the constant step size.
Figure 7: Unit balls in l1,2 norm (5) with different noise levels.
