Figure 1: A hard disk with multipledata formats. Other storage media havethe same space, bandwidth, and localityconsiderations. File-per-image formatshave highly random behavior. Recordformats encode many records at variousdata qualities to save bandwidth andhave sequential behavior for a given fi-delity. PCRs maintain the sequentialbehavior of record formats at multiplefidelities without space overheads.
Figure 2: Top: JPEG carves an imageinto blocks, which are then convertedinto frequencies, quantized, and serial-ized. Progressive compression writesout a subset of important coefficientsfrom each block before re-visiting theblock. Bottom: Higher scans have di-minishing fidelity returns.
Figure 3: PCRs encode label metadatafollowed by all scan groups. Accessingthe dataset at a lower fidelity requiresreading up to a certain address offset.
Figure 4: Top-1 test performance with ResNet-18. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative tofirst epoch. 95% confidence intervals are shown. Higher scan groups are less compressed.
Figure 6: Top-1 test performance with ShuffleNetv2. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative tofirst epoch. 95% confidence intervals are shown. Higher scan groups are less compressed.
Figure 7: The reconstruction quality (measured with MSSIM) of using various amounts of scans.
Figure 8: Data loading stalls areperiodic and are followed by ex-tents of prefetched data. Lowerscan groups reduce stall time.
Figure 9: Training loss with ResNet-18. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative to first epoch.
Figure 10: Training loss with ShuffleNetv2.
Figure 11: The size in bytes of various levels of scans read. Scan group 0 is shown, which containsonly labels and is typically 〜100 bytes. Each scan adds roughly a constant amount of data (i.e.,linear scaling), although certain scans add considerably more than others (i.e., sizes sometimescluster) due to techniques like chroma subsampling. Using all 10 scans can require over an order ofmagnitude more bandwidth than 1-2 scans.
Figure 12:	Testing accuracy with ResNet-18. Epochs are the x-axis. 95% confidence intervals areshown.
Figure 13:	Testing accuracy with ShuffleNetv2. Epochs are the x-axis. 95% confidence intervals areshown.
Figure 14:	Encoding times for baseline JPEG re-encoding and the PCR approach. Total Time isthe combination of JPEG Conversion Time and the Record Creation Time. JPEG Conversion Timeis the amount of time required to convert the JPEG to progressive form or re-encode it to a lowerquality JPEG. Record Creation Time is the amount of time required to write the images to recordformat.
Figure 15: Training accuracy with ResNet-18 (top) and ShuffleNetv2 (bottom) on a coarser versionof the Stanford Cars dataset. The full range of classes is used for Baseline (i.e, car make, model, andyear create a unique class), only car make is used for Make-Only, and a binary classification task ofCorvette detection is used for Is-Corvette. The gap between scan groups closes as the task is mademore simple. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative to first epoch. 95% confidence intervalsare shown.
Figure 16: Training loss with ResNet-18 (top) and ShuffleNetv2 (bottom) on a coarser version ofthe Stanford Cars dataset. The full range of classes is used for Baseline (i.e, car make, model, andyear create a unique class), only car make is used for Make-Only, and a binary classification task ofCorvette detection is used for Is-Corvette. The gap between scan groups closes as the task is mademore simple. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative to first epoch. 95% confidence intervalsare shown.
Figure 17: Training loss and test accuracy with ResNet-18 (top) and ShuffleNetv2 (bottom) on the1000 class ImageNet Dataset. Time is the x-axis (seconds) and is relative to first epoch. 95%confidence intervals are shown.
Figure 18: Examples of scans with the corresponding file size. Images are center cropped fordemonstration. The amount of scans needed to hit an acceptable level of fidelity is small. Having alarger final size (e.g., lossy compression is minimized) results in more savings for earlier scans.
