Figure 1: Illustration of the hierarchical BO algorithm. In standard BO (clock-wise arrow), a map-ping from policy parameters to rewards is learned, i.e., φ 7→ r ∈ R1. We propose a hierarchicalprocess, where first features κ are sampled and later used to predict the potential of policies condi-tioned on these features, φ∣κ → r. The red dots show the first five successive roll-outs in the featureand the policy space of a humanoid postural control task.
Figure 2: (a) Psychological postural control setup for the squat-to-stand movements. (b) Illustrationof the simulated postural control task. An external perturbation is applied during the standing upmotion and the robot has to learn to counter balance. The perturbation is proportional to the CoMvelocity in the superior direction in the sagittal plane.
Figure 3: Histogram showing the number of required trials until the first successful episode for both,the human experiments and the simulated humanoid, With μhuman = 6.15, σhuman = 3.1, μhumanoid =8.3 and σhumanoid = 6.38.
Figure 4: Mean and standard deviaton of the trajectory area (T A) With regard to the number ofepisodes for both, the human experiments and the simulated humanoid. For the humanoid the x-coordinates have been shifted about -0.5 to account for the stretched arms. In addition, the trajec-tory area of the humanoid has been scaled With the factor 0.1 and shifted about -0.2 to alloW easiercomparison.
Figure 5: Comparison of the rewards of the proposed HIBO algorithm and the state-of-the-art ap-proach Bayesian Optimization. Shown are average statistics (mean and standard deviation) over 20runs.
Figure 6: Comparison of the number of successful episodes of the proposed HIBO algorithm andthe state-of-the-art approach Bayesian Optimization for different internal experience replay itera-tions. The last three algorithms implemented an automatic relevance determination of the GaussianProcess features and policy parameters. Shown are average statistics (mean and standard deviation)over 20 runs and the true data values are denoted by the black dots.
