Figure 1: In the vanilla VAE model, an interpolation experiment results in only changing the singlegenerative factor only for (a) gender and (b) skin color.
Figure 2: The architecture of the proposed model, BasisVAE.
Figure 3: The visualization of (a) the general latent space, (b) the disentangled latent space, and (c)latent space of the proposed model with two coordinates.
Figure 4:	(Top) The original images and (bottom) the reconstructed images on (a) MNIST and (b)CelebA datasets. Appendix A shows more generated images.
Figure 5:	The generated images of (a) MNIST and (b) CelebA. In the MNIST dataset, the generateddata is organized in each row by class.
Figure 6: The images generated from a single basis. The corresponding feature is shown above theimage.
Figure 7: The images generated from a single basis. The value of the coefficient is linearly changedalong the row. The corresponding characteristics are shown in the left of the images.
Figure 8: The value of the coefficient is linearly changed along the row. The corresponding charac-teristics are shown in the side of the images. Appendix A shows more generated images.
Figure 9: Randomly generated images with the coefficient ci for bi fixed as 1. According to thebasis element, the images reflecting the corresponding feature are generated. Appendix A showsmore generated images.
Figure 10: The generated CelebA images. Image blur is less than conventional VAE.
Figure 11: The value of the coefficient is linearly changed along the row. The corresponding char-acteristics are shown in the side of the images.
Figure 12: Randomly generated images with the coefficient ci for bi fixed as 1. According to thebasis element, images reflecting the corresponding feature are generated.
Figure 13: The distribution of ci (1 <= i <= 40) that model learns for each data with (a) ”femalewith blond hair”, (b) ”female with black hair”, and (c) ”male with black hair”. We have red boxesfor coefficients where the difference between distributions in (a) and distributions in (b) and c isapparent.
