Figure 1: Narrow gaussians representing one sensor for one odor type approachOne odor = Many sensorsOne sensor= Many odorsCreates unique fingerprint of odorFigure 2: Wide gaussians representing overlap between sensorsdetect food spoilage, and limit food wastage, crypto anchor and block chain, air quality monitoringin industrial or automotive spaces, process monitoring and standardization in the pharmaceutical orchemical industries, and healthcare, where enabling the early detection of diseases could save manylives.
Figure 2: Wide gaussians representing overlap between sensorsdetect food spoilage, and limit food wastage, crypto anchor and block chain, air quality monitoringin industrial or automotive spaces, process monitoring and standardization in the pharmaceutical orchemical industries, and healthcare, where enabling the early detection of diseases could save manylives.
Figure 3: Impact of gas detection technology on different applicationsopment of an electronic nose. Material, hardware and analytics (machine learning or ArtificialIntelligence (AI)).
Figure 4: Electronic Volatile Analyzer (EVA) e-nose device3	Methods3.1	Data AcquisitionWhen collecting data, protocol of data collection is very important as it determines the reproducibil-ity of the training data to have a good model for training the artificial network. The setup we use for3Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020data collection is automated to collect multiple examples of data in a controlled mechanism. Thesetup has an auto-vial selector, to select vials based on the time and sequence of data collection.
Figure 5: Setup of data collection with Electronic Volatile Analyzer (EVA) e-nose deviceData is collected from three different brands of beers, Urquell which is a pale lager with an alcoholcontent of 4.4 percent, Lagunitas is a craft brewery with an alcohol content of 6.2 percent and Raceis a hoppy IPA brewed with malted barley, wheat and crystal malts with an alcohol content of 7.5percent. All samples are poured into a vial and only the head-space is measured as seen from figure5. And we collect data from lab air from a separate vial as a baseline.
Figure 6: An example of a temperature oscillated sensor read-out from a sensorFigure 7: An example of a temperature oscillated sensor read-out from a sensor chunked to 5 equalparts per transition, which will be 30 chunks for the whole sequence from this sensorpercent accuracy with a learning rate of 0.25 and a regularization parameter and mini-batch size of1 (see figure 8).
Figure 7: An example of a temperature oscillated sensor read-out from a sensor chunked to 5 equalparts per transition, which will be 30 chunks for the whole sequence from this sensorpercent accuracy with a learning rate of 0.25 and a regularization parameter and mini-batch size of1 (see figure 8).
Figure 8: Epoch accuracy test Beer one-week dataFigure 9: Mean squared error prediction vs ground truthFigure 10: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air one-week data6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 11: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air two-weeks data4	ConclusionIn this study, a portable electronic nose device is introduced and the device we called EVA is usedto classify between different brands of beers. And as seen from the experiment results using anelectronic nose for identification of different substances based on their smell is very promising.
Figure 9: Mean squared error prediction vs ground truthFigure 10: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air one-week data6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 11: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air two-weeks data4	ConclusionIn this study, a portable electronic nose device is introduced and the device we called EVA is usedto classify between different brands of beers. And as seen from the experiment results using anelectronic nose for identification of different substances based on their smell is very promising.
Figure 10: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air one-week data6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 11: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air two-weeks data4	ConclusionIn this study, a portable electronic nose device is introduced and the device we called EVA is usedto classify between different brands of beers. And as seen from the experiment results using anelectronic nose for identification of different substances based on their smell is very promising.
Figure 11: Confusion matrix of different brands of beer plus lab air two-weeks data4	ConclusionIn this study, a portable electronic nose device is introduced and the device we called EVA is usedto classify between different brands of beers. And as seen from the experiment results using anelectronic nose for identification of different substances based on their smell is very promising.
