Figure 1: Confidence Calibration. For ad-versarial training (AT) and our confidence-calibrated adversarial training (CCAT) withρpow = 10 using the power transition in Eq. (6),we plot the probabilities for all ten classes alongadversarial directions. Adversarial exampleswere computed using our L∞-PGD-Conf at-tack, cf. Sec. 4.1: using projected gradient de-scent (Madry et al., 2018) the confidence of theadversarial examples is maximized for T =1000 and L∞-constraint	= 0.03. The ro-bustness of AT does not generalize beyond the= 0.03-ball as high confidence adversarial ex-amples can be found for larger perturbations,whereas CCAT predicts close to uniform con-fidence after some transition phase allowing toeasily detect adversarial examples.
Figure 2: Momentum and back-tracking. Our L∞ PGD-Conf attack,cf. Sec. 4.1, with 40 iterations withmomentum and backtracking (left) andwithout both (right). We plot the ob-jective of Eq. (4) over iterations for 10samples (different colors).
Figure 3: Confidence histograms on SVHN.
Figure 4: ROC and RErr curves on SVHN.
Figure 5: Confidence histograms on MNIST and Cifar10. As in Fig. 3, we show histogramsof confidences on correctly classified test examples (top) and on successful adversarial examples(bottom) for both AT and CCAT. Note that on AT, the number of successful adversarial examples isusually lower than on CCAT, i.e., reflects the RErr for τ = 0 in Tab. 3; for CCAT in contrast, nearlyall adversarial examples are successful, while only a part has high confidence. Histograms obtainedfor the worst-case adversarial examples across all tested L∞ attacks.
Figure 6: ROC and RErr curves on MNIST and Cifar10. ROC curves, i.e. FPR plotted againstTPR for all possible confidence thresholds τ, and RErr curves, i.e., RErr over confidence thresholdτ for AT and CCAT, including different ρ parameters. Worst-case adversarial examples across allL∞ attacks were tested.
Figure 7: Effect of confidence calibration on SVHN and Cifar10. Confidences for classes alongadversarial directions for AT and CCAT, ρpow = 10. Adversarial examples were computed usingPGD-Conf with T = 2000 iterations and γ = 0.001 and zero initialization. For both AT and CCAT,we show the first ten examples of the test set on SVHN, and the first five examples of the test set onCifar10.
Figure 8: Adversarial examples against AT and CCAT on MNIST, SVHN, and Cifar10. L∞-PGD-Conf adversarial examples for MNIST, = 0.3, and SVHN/Cifar10, = 0.03, for AT and CCAT. Inall cases, twelve test examples have been attacked. On the first six examples, AT has difficulties, onthe IaSt six examples, CCAT has difficulties. We also report the true label y,the target label y oftheadversarial examples and the corresponding confidence fy(X).
Figure 9: Confidence calibration between test examples on MNIST. We plot the confidence for allclasses when interpolating linearly between test examples: (1 - κ)x1 + κx2 for two test examplesx1 and x2; x1 is fixed and we show two examples corresponding to different x2. Additionally, weshow the corresponding images for κ = 0, i.e., x1, κ = 0.5, i.e., the mean image, and κ = 1,i.e., x2, with the corresponding labels and confidences. As can be seen, CCAT with power transi-tion, cf. Eq. (6), is able to perfectly predict a uniform distribution between test examples, while theexponential transition enforces a stronger bias towards the true labels.
