Figure 1: (a) Cartoon depicting the angle between subspace defined by the first two PCs of chaoticactivity (blue) and input driven activity (red). (b) [Left] Projections of the reservoir activity in the 3Dspace of PC Vectors 1, 2, 3 - / [Right] Trajectories of 5 reservoir neurons across 10 different trials- driven by input rotated by θrotate . (c) Relationship between input temporal phase (Θ) and theorientation of driven activity with respect to chaotic subspace (θrotate) for varying input amplitudeand frequency.
Figure 2: (a) A reservoir framework [Left] stimulated by a brief sinusoidal input (t = 0 - 50ms)trained to generate a timed output response shown in [Right]. (b) Cartoon showing the differentangles in the chaotic subspace along which the inputs can be aligned. (c) Euclidean distance betweentrajectories of same (and different) inputs plotted for different orientation of I1 , I2 in the chaoticsubspace. (d) Projections of the reservoir activity in the 3D space ofPC Vectors 1, 2, 3 correspondingto the two inputs I1 , I2 for different alignment conditions.
Figure 3: Evolution of potential energy (and hence attractor state formation) by varying the inputG as a function of ζwhere ∆(τ) =< xi1(t)xi1(t+τ) >. Eqn. 4 resembles the Newtonian motion equation of a classicalparticle moving under the influence of force given by the right hand side of the equation. This forcedepends on C that, in turn, depends on the input subspace alignment (ζ) which directs the initialposition of the particle (or state of the network ∆(0)). From this analogy, it is evident that analyzingthe overall potential energy function of the particle (or network) will be equivalent to visualizing thedifferent attractor states formed in a network in response to a particular input stimulus. Thus, weformulated an expression for the correlation function (with certain constraints) using Taylor seriesexpansion, that allows us to derive the force and hence the dynamics of the network under variousinput alignment conditions.
Figure 4: (a) Handwriting patterns generated across 10 test trials in response to I1 [Top] and I2[Bottom] in absence of external noise (b) Variation of performance (measured as mean squarederror) with different noise amplitude shown for each output pattern in different input alignment sce-narios. C haos90,180,45 represents the error value obtained during “chaos” generation when I1 , I2have 90°, 180°, 45° phase difference in the chaotic subspace, respectively. (C) Generation of hand-writing patterns corresponding to two brief sinusoidal inputs I1 , I2 for different phase differencebetween the inputs in the chaotic subspace. [Left column] shows the patterns generated in absenceof external perturbation in one test trial, [Middle Column] shows the trajectories of5 recurrent unitsin the reservoir across 10 test trials corresponding to each output pattern, [Right Column] shows thepatterns generated in presence external perturbation for one test trial.
Figure A1: (a) [Left] For zero input, projections of the chaotic spontaneous activity onto PC vectors1, 5, 50 , [Middle] Visualization of the chaotic trajectory in 3D subspace composed of dominantPC vectors 1,2,3 that account for significant variance in network activity, [Right] Trajectories of 5reservoir neurons across 10 different trials. (b) Same as panel (a), but for non-chaotic input drivenactivity with input amplitude I0 = 5. (c) Effective dimensionality of the network at different inputamplitudes for g=1.5, g=2.5.
