Figure 1: “Residual learning” mechanism consists of d steps in a single forward pass with the same encoderqθ(z|x) and decoder qφ(x|z). Latent variables are sequentially sampled from the encoder. In step i, only the ithlatent variable zi follows the distribution learned from the current residual. Previous latent variables follow thesame distribution learned from their corresponding residuals. The latent variables zi+1 to zd have fixed 0 value.
Figure 2: Quantitative evaluations. Similar to previous studies, all results are reported on the best 10 of 30runs with random seeds except for (j) and (k). The line and shaded area correspond to the mean and confidenceintervals. (a) and (b): the metric in Kim & Mnih (2018) and the reconstruction error for 2D Shape; (c), (d) and(e): the three metrics in Eastwood & Williams (2018) for Teapots; (f) and (g): ablation study comparing theSeqVAE, ResVAE and SR-VAE using the FactorVAE metric and reconstruction error on 2D Shape; (h) and(i): comparison between SR-VAE and SR-β-VAE, using the FactorVAE metric and reconstruction error on 2DShape; (j) and (k): Sensitivity to initialization study that compares the worst 10 of 30 runs with random seedsusing the FactorVAE metric and reconstruction error on 2D Shape.
Figure 3: (a)-(c) Latent traversals with the same input image across each latent dimension with d = 10 for 2DShape dataset, using SR-VAE, β-VAE and FactorVAE respectively ; (d) Decomposition of decoder output andskip connection at each step in SR-VAE during latent traversal towards the last column of (a).
Figure 4: Left: Latent traversals across each latent dimension with d = 64 for CelebA using SR-VAE, FactorVAEand β-VAE, respectively. Right: Decomposition of decoder output and skip connection at each step in SR-VAEduring latent traversal towards the first column of the corresponding row.
Figure 5: Latent traversals across each latent dimension where d is set to 10 for Chairs dataset.
Figure 6: Latent traversals across each latent dimension where d is set to 10 for Teapots dataset.
