Figure 1: The top row shows the results for the power IB Lagrangian with α = 1, and the bottomrow for the exponential IB Lagrangian with η = 1. In each row, from left to right it is shown(i) the information plane, where the region of possible solutions of the IB problem is shadowedin light orange and the information-theoretic limits are the dashed orange line; (ii) I(T; Y ) as afunction of βh; and (iii) the compression I(X; T) as a function of βh. In all plots the red crossesjoined by a dotted line represent the values computed with the training set, the blue dots the valuescomputed with the validation set and the green stars the theoretical values computed as dictatedby Proposition2. Moreover, in all plots it is indicated I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) = log2 (10) in a dashed,orange line. All values are shown in bits.
Figure 2: Depiction of the clusterization behavior3of the bottleneck variable for the power IB La-grangian with α = 1.
Figure 3: Example of value convergence withthe exponential IB Lagrangian with η = 3. Weshow the intersection of the isolines of LIβBex,epxpfor different βexp ∈ Bexp5with the IB curve.
Figure 4: Graphical representation of the IB curve in the information plane. Dashed lines in orangerepresent tight bounds confining the region (in light orange) of possible IB curves (delimited bythe red line, also known as the Pareto frontier). Black dotted lines are informative values. In bluewe show an example of a possible IB curve confining a region (in darker orange) of an IB curvewhich does not achieve the Pareto frontier. Finally, the yellow star represents the point where therepresentation keeps the same information about the input and the output.
Figure 5: Results for the power IB Lagrangian with α = {0.5, 1, 2}, from top to bottom. In each row,from left to right it is shown (i) the information plane, where the region of possible solutions of the IBproblem is shadowed in light orange and the information-theoretic limits are the dashed orange line;(ii) I(T; Y ) as a function of βh; and (iii) the compression I(X; T) as a function of βh. In all plotsthe red crosses joined by a dotted line represent the values computed with the training set, the bluedots the values computed with the validation set and the green stars the theoretical values computedas dictated by Proposition 2. Moreover, in all plots it is indicated I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) = log2(10) ina dashed, orange line. All values are shown in bits.
Figure 6: Results for the exponential IB Lagrangian with η = {log(2), 1, 1.5}, from top to bottom.
Figure 7: Depiction of the clusterization behavior of the bottleneck variable. In the first row, fromleft to right, the power IB Lagrangian with different values of α = {0.5, 1, 2}. In the second row,from left to right, the exponential IB Lagrangian with different values of η = {log(2), 1, 1.5}.
Figure 8: Theoretical bijection between I(X; T) and different α from βh,min to 1.5 in the power IBLagrangian (top), and different η in the domain Bh in the exponential IB Lagrangian (bottom).
