Figure 1: Illustration of (a) temporal knowledge graph and (b) the Recurrent Event Network(s)architecture. RE-NET employs an RNN to capture s-related interactions Nt (modeled by aneighborhood aggregator) at different time t. Also the global information from Gt is used to capturethe global graph structures. Recurrent event encoder updates its state with graph sequences in anautoregressive manner. The decoder defines the probability P(st, rt, ot|G:t-1) at current time stepconditioned on the preceding events.
Figure 2: Illustration of the multi-relational graph (RGCN) aggregator. The blue node corre-sponds to node s, red nodes are 1-hop neighbors, and green nodes are 2-hop neighbors. Differentcolored edges are different relations. In this figure, we get g(N (s)t), g(N (s)t-1), and g(N (s)t-2)for each graph from a two-layered RGCN aggregator.
Figure 3: Performance of temporal link prediction over future time stamps with filtered Hits@3.
Figure 4: Performance study on model variations. We study the effects of (a) RE-Net with differentaggregators, (b) effect of the global representation from a global graph structure, and (c) empiricalP(s) and P(s, r)methods. which implies that RE-Net effectively infers new events using a powerful event encoderand an aggregator, and provides accurate prediction results.
Figure 5: Parameter sensitivity on RE-Net. We study the effects of (a) length of RNN history inevent sequence encoder, (b) cutoff position at inference time, and (c) number of RGCN layers inneigborhood aggregation.
Figure 6: Performance of temporal link prediction over future time stamps. We report filtered MRR(average metrics in %) on the test sets of ICEWS18, GDELT, WIKI, and YAGO datasets.
Figure 7: Case study of RE-Net’s predictions. RE-NET’s predictions depend on interactionhistories. Interaction histories are categorized into three cases: (1) consistent interactions with anobject, (2) a specific temporal pattern, and (3) irrelevant history. RE-Net achieves good performanceson the first two cases, and poor performances on the third case.
