Figure 2: Tao Te Ching Ink on Bamboonately no excavation evidence so far yet. Anyway all make sense philosophically. Most recently,German Philosopher Hegel said: What is rational is actual and what is actual is rational, which alsomakes sense philosophically. So far so good, so where are we now?Software is eating the world, yet AI is increasingly eating software and software-defined ev-erything. The latest AI research now can generate and synthesize algorithms (hence software)right from requirements as opposed to from just algorithms to software as before. What does itmean to us as a software developer when 500,000 lines of source code via programming getsreplaced by 500 lines of TensorFlow 17 (even much less if in Keras) code via learning? Pleasenote, Apollo 11 mission controller’s source code has only 130,000 lines of assembly code, whilemodern autopilot has millions of line of source code, and Tesla’s Autopilot has 400,000,000lines of source code. Even with the capability of processing PB-scale big data pipeline in real-time, and EB-scale big data lake in batch-mode, all powered by elastic public/private/hybrid cloudcomputing/edge-computing in bare metal/Virtual Machine/Container through Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS)/Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)/Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) leveraging Software-Defined-Compute (SDC), Software-Defined-Network (SDN), Software-Defined-Storage (SDS).
Figure 3: Tao Te Ching Ink on Silk2Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020model Deep Learning Neural Networks (DNN) 5 with billions of connections, millions of parame-ters, hundreds of layers for real-life applications. However, even with such significant progress inboth software and hardware, the matter of fact is the degree of intelligence demonstrated by AI stillfalls far behind of human intelligence in most cases.
Figure 4:	Central Dogma SimplifiedDesign. The phenomena of mirror neutron was hard to explain, quantum entanglement that can beused for teleportation might be one of the possible of explanations. Despite of that, gene is stilla much better explanation at biological level. As of today, the roles of most functional sequencesin human genome still remain not completely decoded, hence unknown. There are three types ofRNA, namely messenger RNA or mRNA, ribosomal or rRNA, and transfer RNA or tRNA, theyserve different roles in inter-playing with both DNA and protein during gene expression. The wayit roughly works through gene regulatory network is called Central Dogma. The transmission ofgenes to organism’s offspring is the basis of the heredity of phenotypic traits. These genes make updifferent DNA sequences called genotypes. Genotypes combined with ecology-based environmentaland evolution-based developmental factors determine what the phenotypes will be. Gene regulatorynetwork is a collection of molecular regulators, which can be DNA, RNA, protein and complexes ofthese, that interact with each other and with other substances in the cell to govern the gene expres-sion levels of mRNA and proteins. Again we still not sure how exactly it works. DNA Computing isa branch of computing which uses DNA, biochemistry, and molecular biology hardware, instead ofthe traditional silicon-based microelectronics technologies. Latest research on DNA Computing canperform reversible DNA Computing bringing it one step closer to the silicon-based microelectron-ics technology, which is called molectronics. DNA computing is very suited as a medium for dataprocessing. According to different calculations a DNA-computer with one liter of fluid containingsix grams of DNA could potentially have a memory capacity of 3072EB. The theoretical maximum
Figure 5:	Alternative View of Central DogmaFor example, epistemology is the branch of philosophy concerned with the theory of knowledge. On-tology in philosophy means the combination of subject and object, hence we can divide epistemol-ogy into intrinsic epistemology and extrinsic epistemology, as well as ontology into intrinsic ontol-ogy and extrinsic ontology. Both Intrinsic Epistemology and Intrinsic Ontology are pre-determinedby gene as soul, and both Extrinsic Epistemology and Extrinsic Ontology are acquired after livingsystem’s birth by learning from environment. Being intrinsic means via heredity, and both evolution-dependent and development-independent, and being extrinsic means both environment-dependentand development-dependent. Actually in information theory, Shannon entropy 21 measures the num-ber of internal arrangements of a system that result in the same outward appearance, and it risesbecause , a system evolves toward states that have many internal arrangements or statistical reasons.
Figure 6: Feedforward Control and Feedback Controltem is conscious, to what degree it is conscious, and what particular experience it is having. Accord-ing to IIT, a system’s consciousness is determined by its causal properties like cause-effect generatedby the relationships among different states the system demonstrates, and is therefore an intrinsic, fun-damental property of any physical system. In contrast to IIT, we interpret and model consciousnesswith environment in consideration by Cybernetics pioneered by Weiner 11 via feed-forward mecha-nism and feedback (both positive and negative) mechanisms, from engineering perspective insteadof philosophical perspective. Cybernetics is a interdisciplinary approach for exploring regulatorysystems, their structures, constraints, and possibilities. Wiener defined cybernetics as, the scientificstudy of control and communication in the animal and the machine. The word cybernetics coincideswith Cogito ergo sum in Latin by Rene Descartes, which means I think, therefore I am. Schrodingerhad a similar vision, he attempted to check whether one’s body functions as a pure mechanism ac-cording to Laws of Nature; and one takes full responsibility for it by controlling so-called the motionof the atoms according to Laws of Nature as consciousness is everywhere, not just in brain.
Figure 7: Deep Reinforcement LearningOFigure 8: Projection of a Calabi-Yau ManifoldThe curvature of SpaceTime is directly related to the energy and momentum. Differential Operators,Lie Groups that provide a natural framework for analyzing the continuous symmetries of differen-tial equations, and Metric Manifolds (Manifolds with Tensor Fields), as special Abelian Groups,are three mathematical foundations of General Relativity; whereas for Quantum Mechanics, theyare Differential Operators, and Hilbert Spaces, which are special Banach Spaces, and special MetricSpaces, and special Topological Spaces. Einstein Field Equation, a system of Nonlinear Partial Dif-ferential Equations, as the core of General Relativity, describes the relation between the geometry ofa 4-Dimensional, Pseudo-Riemannian Manifold in SpaceTime topology, and the energy-momentumcontained in that SpaceTime. Being nonlinear in nature, it is very difficult to solve, except sev-eral known exact solutions under restricted conditions, such as the Schwarzschild Solution, theReissner-Nordstrom Solution, the Kerr Solution, most of those solutions are approximations relyingon computing-based numerical methods such as perturbation or function approximation adoptingDeep Learning based approach. Among them one solution is the Expansion of Universe.
Figure 8: Projection of a Calabi-Yau ManifoldThe curvature of SpaceTime is directly related to the energy and momentum. Differential Operators,Lie Groups that provide a natural framework for analyzing the continuous symmetries of differen-tial equations, and Metric Manifolds (Manifolds with Tensor Fields), as special Abelian Groups,are three mathematical foundations of General Relativity; whereas for Quantum Mechanics, theyare Differential Operators, and Hilbert Spaces, which are special Banach Spaces, and special MetricSpaces, and special Topological Spaces. Einstein Field Equation, a system of Nonlinear Partial Dif-ferential Equations, as the core of General Relativity, describes the relation between the geometry ofa 4-Dimensional, Pseudo-Riemannian Manifold in SpaceTime topology, and the energy-momentumcontained in that SpaceTime. Being nonlinear in nature, it is very difficult to solve, except sev-eral known exact solutions under restricted conditions, such as the Schwarzschild Solution, theReissner-Nordstrom Solution, the Kerr Solution, most of those solutions are approximations relyingon computing-based numerical methods such as perturbation or function approximation adoptingDeep Learning based approach. Among them one solution is the Expansion of Universe.
