Figure 1: Examples of the Color Switch, Pushblock and Crafting hypothesis verification environments3.3	Hypothesis ConstructionIn the following sections, we discuss different types of hypotheses about the environment in order ofincreasing complexity.
Figure 2: Pre-condition Post-condition reward pretraining on our verification environments.0.8.6.42.0Lo.o.o.o.o.
Figure 3: Final accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses on Color Switch (left) andPushblock (right)Figure 3 and left of Figure 4 show our final hypothesis verification results. We show the max out offive for each of the methods shown. We also break down the final hypothesis prediction accuracyfor our methods in Table 1, and show its success on the triplet hypotheses (which our methods werepretrained on) and non-triplet hypotheses (which they were not).
Figure 4: Final accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses on Crafting (left) and a visualiza-tion of the finetuned policy (right)and “independence” hypotheses. Note that the prediction network that verifies the hypotheses giventhe trajectory from the policy still needs to fine-tune on the new templates.
Figure 5: (left) policy network ablation (right) prediction network ablation.
Figure 6: Network architecture for our policy network (left) and prediction network (right)I fc I.ι .[sigmoidC.2 Implementation and hyperparametersWe take much of our implementation of transformers from Rush (2018).
Figure 7: Final accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses onCrafting with variance plottedColor Switch Pushblock and20Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2020E S taged Random Seed ValidationIn this experiment, we perform a two-stage procedure for evaluating our results. The idea is that weuse one set of hypotheses to determine which random seeds are successful and then show results onthe larger set of hypotheses.
Figure 8: Hypothesis accuracy on only the triplet hypotheses for the Color Switch, Pushblock, andCrafting environments. Shown with the max seeds and the variance bands with 25 random seeds.
Figure 9: Hypothesis accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses for the Color Switch,Pushblock, and Crafting environments. Shown with the max seeds and the variance bands. We use a80% accuracy as a cutoff for this figure.
Figure 10: Hypothesis accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses for the Color Switch,Pushblock, and Crafting environments. Shown with the max seeds and the variance bands. We use a90% accuracy as a cutoff for this figure.
Figure 11:Pushblock,accuracy asHypothesis accuracy on both triplet and non-triplet hypotheses for the Color Switch,and Crafting environments. Shown with the means and the variance bands. We use a 90%a cutoff for this figure.
Figure 12: Pretraining Reward for ColorSwitch for intrinsic motivation. Showing mean and variancebands on 25 random seeds.
Figure 13: Pretraining Reward for Pushblock for intrinsic motivation. Showing mean and variancebands on 25 random seeds.
Figure 14: Pretraining Reward for Crafting for intrinsic motivation. Showing mean and variancebands on 25 random seeds.
Figure 15: Final hypothesis accuracies using intrinsic pre-training. Without finetuning of policy.
Figure 16: Final hypothesis accuracies using intrinsic pre-training. With finetuning of policy. Showingmax results and variance bounds on 25 seeds.
Figure 17: Results on training RL with oracle predictor on crafting environment. Showing mean andvariance on 25 random seeds.
Figure 18: Final hypothesis accuracies of baselines when trained longer. Showing max and variancebands on original 5 seeds.
Figure 19: Final hypothesis accuracies of baselines when trained longer. Showing max and variancebands on 25 seeds.
Figure 20: Final hypothesis accuracies of baselines using longer state memory parameter N . Showingmax and variance. Result on 25 seeds.
Figure 21: Final hypothesis accuracies of all methods trained with 25 random seeds. Showing maxand variance.
Figure 22: Final hypothesis accuracies of all methods trained with 25 random seeds. Showing meanand variance.
