Figure 1: The figure shows the reliability of the AVF and VMC estimators. The x axis shows thenumber of evaluation episodes, while the y axis shows the probability that P does not belong tothe interval (p/3, 3p). This probability is obtained by repeating the evaluation multiple times andplotting the fraction of these runs when the estimate is outside of the target interval. The AVFestimator reliably approaches ground truth dramatically faster than the VMC estimator. We showerror bars of 2 standard errors, which are difficult to see on the Driving domain, since we can affordto run sufficiently many trials that standard errors are near zero.
Figure 2: Model selection: We plot theexpected number of episodes until failure,i.e. 1/p where p is the probability of fail-ure, for the best policy selected by theAVF vs. VMC estimators. The error barsshow the min/max over 5 random seeds,while the solid lines correspond to the av-eraged failure probability. The VMC es-timator largely maintains a uniform distri-bution over many of the policies, whereasthe AVF estimator quickly eliminates theworst policies.
Figure 3: This figure shows the reliability of the AVF and VMC estimators for various choices ofr = ρ. As before, the x axis shows the number of evaluation episodes. The y-axis shows theprobability that P does not belong in the interval (p/r,pr). The probability is obtained by runningthe evaluation multiple times, and we include error bars of 2 standard errors. Note that the curvesare not smooth especially for the VMC estimator. This is not because of the uncertainty in the plotsbut is a property of ρ-estimators when the sample size is small, that is on the order of 1/p. For suchsample sizes, increasing the sample size does not monotonically improve the estimator’s accuracy.
Figure 4: We show the robustness for agents taken from different points in training. The failureprobability of each agent is estimated using 160, 000 experiments with VMC. Note that the robust-ness does not improve monotonically, and that simply choosing the final agent would not provide arobust agent.
