Figure 1: Two visual metamers are physically different images that when fixated on the orange dot(center), should remain perceptually indistinguishable to each other for an observer. Colored circleshighlight different distortions in the visual field that observers do not perceive in our model.
Figure 2: The NeuroFovea metamer generation schematic: An input image and a noise patch arefed through a VGG-Net encoder into a new feature space. Through spatial control we can producean interpolation for each pooling region in such feature space between the stylized-noise (texture),and the content (the input image). This is how we successfully impose both global image andlocal texture-like constraints in every pooling region. The metamer is the output of the pooled (andinterpolated) feature vector through the Meta VGG-Net Decoder.
Figure 3: Interpolating between an image’s intrinsic content and texture via a convex combination inthe output of the VGG19 Encoder E. Here we are treating the patch as a single pooling region. In ourmodel, this interpolation given Eq. 1 is done for every pooling region in the visual field.
Figure 5: Potential issues of psychophysical intractability for the joint estimation of (S) and γ(∙) asdescribed by our model. Running a psychophysical experiment that runs an exhaustive search forupper bounds for the scale and distortion parameters for every receptive field is intractable. The goalof Experiment 1 is to solve this intractabitilty posed formally in Eq. 6 via a simulated experiment.
Figure 6: A color-coded collection of images used in our experiments.
Figure 7: Perceptual optimization.
Figure 8: The result of each SSIM (top) for Experiment 1 for a scale of s = 0.3 where we findthe critical α for each receptive field ring as we minimize E(∆-SSIM)2 (bottom). E(∆-SSIM)2 isminimized by matching the perceptual distortion of the Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) (MFS) andNeuroFovea (MNF) metamers in Eq. 9. Each color represents a different 512 × 512 image trajectory,the black line (bottom) shows the average. Only the first 4 eccentricity dependent receptive fields areshown.
Figure 9: Top: The average α-noise distortion over the entire visual field for our 10 images withoutassuming tangential homogeneity. Notice that on average, α increases radially. Bottom: The γ(∙)which completely defines the α-noise distortion for any receptive field as a function of its size (radius).
Figure 10: Metamer generation proces for Experiment 2. We modulate the distortion for eachreceptive field according to γ to perform an optimization as in Freeman & Simoncelli (2011).
Figure 11: Experiment 2 shows the ABX metamer discrimination task done by the observers. Humansmust fixate at the center of the image (no eye-movements) throughout the trial for it to be valid.
Figure 12: The results of the 3 observers and the pooled observer (average; shown on far right) forthe Synth vs Reference and Synth vs Synth experiment for our metamers. The error bars denote the68% confidence interval after bootstrapping the trials per observer.
Figure 13: Image embeddings.
Figure 14: Reference Metamers at the scale of s = 0.25, at which they are indiscriminable to thehuman observer. The color coding scheme matches the data points of the optimization in Experiment 1and the psychophysics of Experiment 2. All images used in the experiments were generated originallyat 512 × 512 px subtending 26×26 d.v.a (degrees of visual angle).
Figure 15: Algorithmic (top) and visual (bottom) comparisons between our metamers and a samplefrom Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) for a scaling factor of 0.3. Each model has it’s own limitations:The FS model can not directly compute an inverse of the encoded representation to generate a metamer,requiring an iterative gradient descent procedure. Our NF model is limited by the capacity of theencoder-decoder architecture as it does not achieve lossless compression (perfect reconstruction).
Figure 16: Decomposition and overview of the metamer generation process in the Image space, theEncoded space and the Perceptual space. The original image patch is coded in blue, the V1 metamersare coded in purple, and the V2 metamers are coded in pink. Dark brown represents the initial whitenoise that is later stylized via AdaIN through S(。). Note that these two points are far away to eachother in image space, but quite closeby in perceptual space as they are also ‘metameric’ to each other.
Figure 17: Pilot Data on FS metamers.
Figure 18: A collection of scale invariant γ(o)'s across multiple IQA metrics for the perceptualoptimization scheme of Experiment 1. In this figure we superimpose all maximal α-noise distortionsfor each scale, and find a function that fits all the points showing that γ is indepedent of scale.
Figure 19: Top: The maximum α-noise distortion computed per pooling region, and collapsed overall images for each IQA metric. Bottom: When averaging across all the pooling regions for eachretinal eccentricity, We find that the Y function is invariant to scale as in our original experiment -suggesting that our perceptual optimization scheme is flexible across IQA metrics.
Figure 20: A permutation test was ran and determined that each γ function is also scale independentunder the 99% confidence interval (CI), as we increased the CI to account for false discovery rates(FDR). Indeed, when we perform the permutation tests and use a 95% confidence interval (shown inthe figure with the vertical lines in cyan), all curves except for MS-SSIM and IW-SSIM only for thescaling factor of 0.3 show a significant difference P ~ 0.02 (non FDR-corrected), potentially due tosmall receptive field sizes, which bias the estimates. All other differences in the d parameter of thesigmoid function, with respect to the average fitted sigmoid, are statistically insignificant.
