Figure 1: In NGE, several mutation operations are allowed. By using Policy Sharing, child species reuseweights from parents, even if the graphs are different. The same color indicates shared and reused weights. Forbetter visualization, we only plot the sharing of propagation model (yellow curves).
Figure 2: The performance of the graph search for RGS, ES and NGE. The figures on are theexample creatures obtained from each of the method. The graph structure next to the figure are thecorresponding graph structure. We included the original species for reference.
Figure 3: The genealogy tree generated using NGE for fish. The number next to the node isthe reward (the averaged speed of the fish). For better visualization, We down-sample genealogyFigure 4: Fine-tuning results on different creatures compared with baseline where structure is fixed.
Figure 4: Fine-tuning results on different creatures compared with baseline where structure is fixed.
Figure 5: Results of ablation study, NGE without uncertainty results and rapid evolution duringexperiments.
Figure 6:	In this figure, we show the computation graph of NerveNet++. At each timestep, everynode in the graph updates its hidden state by absorbing the messages as well as the input feature. Theoutput function takes the hidden states as input and outputs the controller (or policy) of the agent.
Figure 7:	In these two figures, we show that to reach similar performance, NerveNet++ took shortertime comparing to original NerveNet.
Figure 8: Our walker species gradually grows two foot-like structures from randomly initializedbody graph.
Figure 9: We present qualitative comparison between the three algorithms in the figure. Specifically,the aligned comparison between our method and naive baseline are the representative creatures atthe same generation (using same computation resources). Our algorithm notably display strongerdominance in terms of its structure as well as reward.
Figure 10: The results of resetting controller scheme and baselines.
Figure 11: The results of the graph searchSince the number of generations for the RGS baseline can be regarded as 1, its curve is plotted withthe number of updates normalized by the computation resource as x-axis.
