Figure 1: Scheme of incremental training experiments conducted in this article (a) and representative outcomeswith (b) and without CF (C). The sequential learning tasks used in this study only have two sub-tasks: D1 andD2 . During training (white baCkground) and re-training (gray baCkground), test aCCuraCy is measured on D1(blue, M), D2 (green, 2) and D1 ∪ D2 (red, #). The blue Curve allows to determine the presenCe of CF bysimple visual inspeCtion: if there is signifiCant degradation w.r.t. the red Curve, then CF has oCCurred.
Figure 2: Best FC experiments for DP10-10. The blue surfaces (epochs 0-10) represent the accuracy on Di,the green (covered here) and red surfaces the accuracy on D2 and D1 ∪ D2 during re-training (epochs 10-20).
Figure 3: Best D-FC experiments for SLT D5-5, to be read as Fig. 2 and showing the occurrence of CF. Seealso Appendix B for 2D plots.
Figure 4: Illustrating the difference between the “best” and “last” criterion for EWC. Shown is the accuracyover time for the best model on SLT D9-1c using EMNIST (a), D9-1a using EMNIST (b) and D9-1b usingDevanagari (c). The blue curve (M) measures the accuracy on D1 , green (2) only on D2 and red (#) theD1 ∪ D2 during the training (white) and the re-training phase (gray). Additionally, the baseline (dashed line)is indicated. In all three experiments, the “best” strategy results in approximately 90% accuracy, occurring atthe beginning of re-training when D2 has not been learned yet. Here, the magnitude of the best/last differenceis a good indicator of CF which clearly happens in (c), partly in (b) and slightly or not at all in (a).
Figure 5: Best EWC experiments for SLT D5-5d constructed from all datasets, to be read as Fig. 2. We observethat CF happens for all datasets. See also Appendix B for 2D plots.
Figure 6: Accuracy measurements of best IMM model on SLT D5-5f for DeVanagari dataset. On the left-handside, the blue curve (M) measures the accuracy of the first DNN trained on D1, the green curve (2) the accuracyof the second DNN trained on D2 . Additionally, the baseline (dashed line) is delineated. The right-hand sideshows the tested accuracy on D1 ∪ D2 of the merged DNN as a function of α, both for mean-IMM (red #) andthe mode-IMM (orange O) Variants. See also Appendix B for 2D plots.
Figure 7: Best WtIMM experiments for SLT D5-5b constructed from datasets We were able to test. The bluesurfaces (epochs 0-10) represent the test accuracy during training on D1, the green surfaces the test accuracy onD2 during training on D2 (epochs 10-20). The White bars in the middle represent baseline accuracy, Whereasthe right part shoWs accuracies on D1 ∪ D2 for different α Values, computed for mean-IMM (orange surfaces)and mode-IMM (red surfaces). See also Appendix B for 2D plots.
Figure 8: Best WtIMM experiments for the tested datasets for SLT D9-1c, to be read as Fig. 7. See alsoAppendix B for 2D plots.
