Figure 1: We train NeuroSAT to predict whether SAT problems are satisfiable, providing only asingle bit of supervision for each problem. At test time, when NeuroSAT predicts satisfiable, we canalmost always extract a satisfying assignment from the network’s activations. The problems at testtime can also be substantially larger, more difficult, and even from entirely different domains thanthe problems seen during training.
Figure 2: High-level illustration of NeuroSAT operating on the graph representation of {1∣2,1∣2}.
Figure 3: The sequence of literal votes LII) to L*24) as NeuroSAT runs on a Satisfiable problemfrom SR(20). For clarity, We reshape each Ltt to be an Rn× 2 matrix so that each literal is pairedwith its complement; specifically, the ith row contains the scalar votes for Xi and xi. Here whiterepresents zero, blue negative and red positive. For several iterations, almost every literal is votingunsat with low confidence (light blue). Then a few scattered literals start voting sat for the next fewiterations, but not enough to affect the mean vote. Suddenly there is a phase transition and all theliterals (and hence the network as a whole) start to vote sat with very high confidence (dark red).
Figure 4: PCA projections for the high-dimensional literal embeddings L(12) to L(26) (skippingevery other time step) as NeuroSAT runs on a satisfiable problem from SR(40). Blue and reddots indicate literals that are set to 0 and 1 in the satisfying assignment that it eventually finds,respectively. We see that the blue and red dots are mixed up and cannot be linearly separated until thephase transition at the end, at which point they form two distinct clusters according to the satisfyingassignment.
Figure 5: NeuroSAT’s success rate on SR(n)for a range of n as a function of the number ofiterations T . Even though we only train Neu-roSAT on SR(40) and below, it is able to solveSAT problems sampled from SR(n) forn muchlarger than 40 by simply running for more itera-tions.
Figure 6: Example graph from the Forest-Firedistribution. The graph has a coloring for k ≥ 5,a clique for k ≤ 3, a dominating set for k ≥ 3,and a vertex cover for k ≥ 6. However, theseproperties are not perceptually obvious and re-quire deliberate computation to determine.
Figure 7: The sequence of literal votes Le) as NeuroUNSAT runs on a pair of problems fromSRC(30, PP(3, 2)). In both cases, the literals in the first six rows are involved in the unsat core.
