Figure 1:	Performance of LLL models across different measures on Permuted MNIST and SplitCIFAR. ForAccuracy (AT) and Learning CurveMeasure (LCA10) the higher the number (indicatedby ↑) the better is the model. ForForgetting (FT), Time andMemory the lower the number (indicatedby ]) the better is the model. For Time and Memory, the method with the highest COmpIexity is takenas a reference (value of 1) and the other methods are reported relative to that method. AT, FTand LCA10 values and confidence intervals are computed over 5 runs. A-GEM provides the besttrade-offacross different measures and dimensions. Other baselines are given in Tab. 4 and 7 in theAppendix, which are used to generate the plots.
Figure 2:	Performance of LLL models across different measures on Split CUB and Split AWA.Onboth the datasets, PROG-NN runs out of memory. The memory and time complexities of joint em-bedding models are the same as those ofthe corresponding standard models and are hence omitted.
Figure 4: Evolution of LCA during the first ten mini-batches.
Figure 3: Top Row: Evolution of average accuracy (Ak) as new tasks are learned. Bottom Row:Evolution of LCA during the first ten mini-batches.
Figure 5: Evolution of zero-shot performance as the learner sees new tasks on Split CUB and SplitAWA datasets.
Figure 6: Number of constraint violations in gem and a-gem on Permuted MNIST and SplitCIFAR as new tasks are learned.
Figure 7:	Permuted MNIST: Change in average accuracy and forgetting as the number of epochsare increased. Tokens ’-S’ and ’-B’ denote smaller and bigger networks, respectively.
Figure 8:	Split CIFAR: Change in average accuracy and forgetting as the number of epochs areincreased. Tokens ’-S’ and ’-B’ denote smaller and bigger networks, respectively.
Figure 9: Pictorial description of the joint embedding model discussed in the Sec. 5 of the mainpaper. Modules; φθ(.) and ψω(.) are implemented as feed-forward neural networks with P andA X D parameters, respectively. The descriptor of task k (tk ) is a matrix of dimensions Ck X A,shared among all the examples of the task, constructed by concatenating the A-dimensional classattribute vectors of Ck classes in the task.
