Figure 1: Vision-and-Language Navigation task and our proposed self-monitoring agent. The agentis constantly aware of What was completed, What is next, and where to go, as it navigates throughunknown environments by following navigational instructions.
Figure 2: Proposed self-monitoring agent consisting of visual-textual co-grounding, progress mon-itoring, and action selection modules. Textual grounding: identify which part of the instruction hasbeen completed or ongoing and which part is potentially needed for next action. Visual grounding:summarize the observed surrounding images. Progress monitor: regularize and ensure groundedinstruction reflects progress towards the goal. Action selection: identify which direction to go.
Figure 3: The positions and weights of grounded instructions as agents navigate by followinginstructions. Our self-monitoring agent with progress monitor demonstrates the grounded instructionused for action selection shifts gradually from the beginning of instructions towards the end. This isnot true of the baseline method.
Figure 4: Successful self-monitoring agent navigates in two unseen environments. The agent isable to correctly follow the grounded instruction and achieve the goal successfully. The percentageof instruction completeness estimated by the proposed progress monitor gradually increases as theagent navigates and approaches the goal. Finally, the agent grounded the word ”Stop” to stop (seethe supplementary material for full figures).
Figure 5: Successful self-monitoring agent navigates in two different unseen environments. Giventhe navigational instruction located at the top of the figure, the agent starts from starting position andfollows the instruction towards the goal. The percentage of instruction completeness estimated bythe proposed progress monitor gradually increases as the agent navigates and approaches the goal.
Figure 6: Successful self-monitoring agent navigates in (a) unseen and (b) seen environments. (a)The given instruction is ambiguous as it only asks the agent to take actions around the stairs. Sincethere are multiple duplicated actions described in the instruction, e.g. ”walk up” and ”turn left”, onlyan agent that is able to precisely follow the instruction step-by-step can successfully complete thetask. Otherwise, the agent is likely to stop early before it reaches the goal. (b) The agent correctlypays attention to parts of the instruction for making decisions on selecting navigable directions. Boththe agents decide to stop when shifting the textual grounding on the last sentence period.
Figure 7: Failed self-monitoring agent navigates in unseen environments. (a) The agent missed the”take a left” at step 1, and consequently unable to follow the following instruction correctly. How-ever, note that the progress monitor correctly reflected that the instruction was not completed. Whenthe agent decides to end the navigation, it reports that only 16% of the instruction was completed.
