Figure 1: HarmonicGAN corrects major failures in multiple domains: (a) for medical images it correctsincorrectly removed (top) and added (bottom) tumors; and (b) for horse → zebra transfiguration it does notincorrectly transform the background (top) and performs a complete translation (bottom).
Figure 2: For CycleGAN, the reconstructed image may per-fectly match the source image under the circularity constraintwhile translated image dose not maintain the inherent prop-erty of the source image (e.g. a tumor), thus generating unex-pected results (e.g. incorrectly removing a tumor).
Figure 3: Architecture of HarmonicGAN, consisting of a pair of inverse generators G, F and two discrimina-tors DX , DY . The objective combines an adversarial constraint, circularity constraint and smoothness term.
Figure 4: Visualization using t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to illustrate the effectiveness of the smoothnessterm in HarmonicGAN (best viewed in color). As shown in the top two figures (source and target respectively),the smoothness term acts as a graph Laplacian imposed on all pairs of image patches. Bottom-left: For twosimilar patches in the original sample, if one patch is translated to a tumor region while the other is not, thetwo patches will have a large distance in the target space, resulting in a translation that incorrectly adds a tumorinto the original sample (result for CycleGAN shown). Bottom-right: For two similar patches in the originalsample, if the translation maintains the non-tumor property of these two patches in the translated sample thenthe two patches will also be similar in the target space (result for HarmonicGAN shown).
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison for BRATS, Cityscapes and horse o zebra (see appendix for more images).
Figure 6: Comparison of CycleGAN, DistanceGAN and the proposed HarmonicGAN on BRATS dataset.
Figure 7: Comparison on horse 什 zebra for the Putin photo. CyCleGAN translates both the background andhuman to a zebra-like texture. In contrast, HarmonicGAN does better in background region and achieves animprovement in some regions of of the human (Putin’s face), but it still fails on the human body. We hypothesizethis is because the semantic features used by HarmonicGAN have not been trained on humans without a shirt.
Figure 8: For similar image patches in input images, visualizing the average distance of corresponding imagepatches in translated images for cross-modal medical image synthesis on BRATS dataset. The distance ofimage patches in the target space shows the inconsistently translated patches.
Figure 9: Comparison on BRATS dataset.
Figure 10:	Comparison on horse o zebra.
Figure 11:	Additional results of the proposed HarmonicGAN. From top to bottom are: apple to orange, orangeto apple, facade to label, label to facade, aerial to map, map to aerial, summer to winter, winter to summer.
