Figure 1: Qualitative examples of human and DNN minimal images. Human minimal images and theirless-recognizable sub-images from Ullman et al. (2016); and DNN analogs for the same images.
Figure 2:	Qualitative examples of fragile recognition images (FRI). Examples are for ResNet (He et al., 2016)analogs to human minimal images. The incorrectly classified image region is slightly (two pixels) smaller thanthe correctly classified crop. Even when DNNs show a significant change in confidence between regions, humansrecognize them at similar rates.
Figure 3:	The process of generating a fragile recognition image (FRI) map from a full image. The FRI mapshows FRIS for which a one-pixel shift in any direction of the visible region produces an incorrect classification(i.e. loose shift - see definition in 2). The white pixels indicate FRIs and black pixels indicate non FRIs.
Figure 4: Fragile recognition image (FRI) maps. White pixels indicate FRIS and black pixels indicate non FRIs.
Figure 5: Fragile recognition images (FRIs) in ImageNet. FRIs are generally less frequent for larger regionsof the image. (a) Loose shrink FRIs, which indicate the general fragility of DNNs to a slight reduction in thevisible region. (b) Strict shrink FRIs, which are the equivalent to human minimal images. Shift FRIs also followthis pattern (see Figure A.1).
Figure 6: Impact of data augmentation and regularization in fragile recognition (CIFAR-10). FRIs can bemitigated but not eliminated. (a) shows that augmenting the training set with crops of FRI sizes reduces overallFRI occurrence, but many FRIs remain. (b) shows that commonly used regularizers may also reduce thepercentage of FRIs, but they still occur.
Figure 7: Comparison of location invariance and fragile recognition images (CIFAR-10). FRIs are distinct fromtranslation-based adversarial examples. (a) shows that maximum pooling makes the DNN almost entirely robustto translation by maximizing location invariance; the remaining 10% of translations that do cause variation aregenerally at the edge of the black background and are due to edge effects (see Figure A.7). By contrast, (b)shows that larger pooling sizes provide little to no robustness to slight shifts of the visible region.
