Figure 1: The proposed policy decomposition into a perceptor and a program.
Figure 2: A diagram of the cart-pole experimental setup.
Figure 3: Learning performance at the cart-pole balancing task of the perceptor gradients algorithm(left) compared to standard policy gradients (right).
Figure 4: The latent space learnt by a perceptor (left) and βVAE (right). The thick coloured linesrepresent the predicted mean, while the shaded regions represent ±1σ of the predicted variance.
Figure 5: A diagram of the ’go to pose’ experimental setup.
Figure 6: Learning performance at the ’go to pose’ task of the perceptor gradients (left) comparedto the policy gradients (right).
Figure 7: Confusion matrices between the values predicted by the perceptor (horizontally) and thetrue values (vertically) for each of the symbolic state components.
Figure 8: Sampled images of states following a symbolically defined trajectory.
Figure 9: A diagram of the ’collect wood’ experimental setup (baseline networks not illustrated).
Figure 10: Learning performance at the ’collect wood’ task of the perceptor gradients (left) com-pared to the policy gradients (right).
Figure 11: Sampled images from a symbolic specification over the joint latent space of the pose andwood perceptors.
Figure 12: Architecture of the cart-pole feedforward perceptor ψθ and the baseline network bφ .
Figure 13: Architecture of the ’go-to pose’ autoencoding perceptor ψθ, the decoder ωυ and thebaseline network bφ. Convolutions are represented as #filters × filter size and all of them have astride of 2. Transposed convolutions (convT) are represented in the same way. Linear layers aredenoted by the number of output units.
Figure 14: Learning performance with a feedforward perceptor at the ’go to pose’ task of the per-ceptor gradients (left) compared to the policy gradients (right).
Figure 15: Learning performance with a feedforward perceptor at the ’collect wood’ task of theperceptor gradients (left) compared to the policy gradients (right).
Figure 16: Confusion matrices between the values predicted by the feedforward perceptor (horizon-tally) and the true values (vertically) for each of the symbolic state components.
