Figure 1: A simple subsplit Bayesian network for a leaf set that contains 4 species. Left: A leaf labelset X of 4 species, each label corresponds to a DNA sequence. Middle (left): Examples of (rooted)phylogenetic trees that are hypothesized to model the evolutionary history of the species. Middle(right): The corresponding SBN assignments for the trees. For ease of illustration, subsplit (W, Z)is represented as WZ in the graph. The dashed gray subgraphs represent fake splitting processeswhere splits are deterministically assigned, and are used purely to complement the networks suchthat the overall network has a fixed structure. Right: The SBN for these examples.
Figure 2: Branch length parameteriza-tion using primary subsplit pairs, Whichis the sum of parameters for a split andits neighboring subsplit pairs. Edge erepresents a split (W, Z). Parameteriza-tion for the variance is the same as forthe mean.
Figure 3: Comparison of multi-sample objective on approximating a challenging distribution overunrooted phylogenetic trees with 8 leaves using VIMCO and RWS gradient estimators. Left: Ev-idence lower bound. Middle: KL divergence. Right: Variational approximations vs ground truthprobabilities. The number in brackets specifies the number of samples used in the training objective.
Figure 4: Performance on DS1. Left: KL divergence for methods that use the simple split-basedparameterization for the branch length distributions. Middle: KL divergence for methods that usePSP. Right: Per-tree marginal likelihood estimation (in nats): VBPI vs GSS. The number in bracketsspecifies the number of samples used in the training objective. MCMC results are averaged over 10independent runs. The results for VBPI were obtained using 1000 samples and the error bar showsone standard deviation over 100 independent runs.
Figure 5: A comparison of majority-rule consensus trees obtained from VBPI and ground truthMCMC run on DS1. Left: Ground truth MCMC. Right: VBPI (10000 sampled trees). The plot iscreated using the treespace (Jombart et al., 2017) R package.
