Figure 2: Architecture of thecritic. FC stands for fully con-nected neural network.
Figure 3: Learning curves during the learning of the PP and CCN tasks. The plots show the average time takento complete the task, where shorter time is better for the agents.
Figure 4: Instances of scheduling re-sults over 25 time steps in PPFigure 5: Encoded messages projectedonto 2D plane in PP taskbut it can observe the situation of the other agent. We introduce heterogeneity into the scenario,where the agent-destination distance at the beginning of the task differs across agents. The metricused to gauge the performance is the number of time steps taken to complete the CCN task.
Figure 5: Encoded messages projectedonto 2D plane in PP taskbut it can observe the situation of the other agent. We introduce heterogeneity into the scenario,where the agent-destination distance at the beginning of the task differs across agents. The metricused to gauge the performance is the number of time steps taken to complete the CCN task.
Figure 7:	illustrations of the experimental environment12Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019B.1	Environments: PP and CCNPredator and prey We assess SchedNet in this predator-prey setting as in Stone & Veloso (2000),illustrated in Figure 7a. This setting involves a discretized grid world and multiple cooperatingpredators who must capture a randomly moving prey. Agents’ observations include position ofthemselves and the relative positions of the prey, if observed. The observation horizon of eachpredator is limited, thereby emphasizing the need for communication. The termination criterion forthe task is that all agents observe the prey, as in the right of Figure 7a. The predators are rewardedwhen the task is terminated. We note that agents may be endowed with different observation hori-zons, making them heterogeneous. We employ four agents in our experiment, where only agent 1has a 5 × 5 view while agents 2, 3, and 4 have a smaller, 3 × 3 view. The performance metric is thenumber of time steps taken to capture the prey.
Figure 8:	Performance evaluation of SchedNet. The graphs show the average time taken to complete the task,where shorter time is better for the agents.
Figure 9:	Projection of encoded messages into 2D plane in PP.
Figure 10: Impact of applying RNN (k1 and l = 2)this case, RNN helps to improve the performance by tack-ling the partial observable issue. On the other hand, SchedNet-RNN and SchedNet achieve similarperformance. We think that the communication in SchedNet somewhat resolves the partial observ-able issues, so the impact of considering temporal correlation with RNN is relatively small. Al-though applying RNN to SchedNet is not really that helpful in this simple environment, we expectthat in a more complex environment, using the recurrent connection is more helpful.
Figure 12: Proposed scheduling architecture. Each agent i calculates its scheduling weight wi from weightgenerator (WG), and the corresponding scheduling profile c ∈ {0, 1}n is determined by the scheduling algo-rithm (k) (WSA(k)), satisfying the condition ||c||1 = k.
