Figure 1: We present LeMoNADe, a novel approach to identify neuronal assemblies directly fromcalcium imaging data. In contrast to previous methods, LeMoNADe does not need pre-processingsteps such as cell identification and spike time extraction for unravelling assemblies.
Figure 2: Schematic sketch of the proposed method. In this toy example, the input video x is anadditive mixture of two motifs (highlighted in red and blue) plus noise, as shown in (a). To learn themotifs and activations, the loss between input video x and reconstructed video x0 is minimized. (b)shows the generation of the reconstructed video through the proposed VAE framework.
Figure 3: Plate diagram and proposed generative and recognition model. We show the plate diagramof the proposed model (left), where red (solid) lines correspond to the generative/decoding processand blue (dashed) lines correspond to the recognition/encoding model. On the right the equations forthe generative as well as the recognition model are given.
Figure 4: Similarities between found motifs and ground truth for different noise levels. We show forLeMoNADe (lime green) and SCC (blue) the average similarities between found motifs and groundtruth for ten different noise levels ranging from 0% up to 90% spurious spikes. Error bars indicate thestandard deviation. For each noise level 20 different datasets were analyzed. For both, LeMoNADeand SCC, the similarities between found and ground truth motifs are significantly above the 95%-tileof the corresponding bootstrap distribution (red) up to a noise level of 70% spurious spikes. AlthoughLeMoNADe does not need the previous extraction of individual cells, it performs as well as SCC indetecting motifs and also shows a similar stability in the presence of noise.
Figure 5: Exemplary result from one synthetic dataset. (a) shows a single plot containing all threemotifs as additive RGB values for the ground truth motifs (top) and discovered motifs (bottom). Thefound motifs were ordered manually and temporally aligned to match the ground truth, for betterreadability. The complete motif sequences can be found in figure 10 in appendix E.1. In (b) theactivations z of the found motifs are shown in red for the complete video (left) and a small excerpt ofthe sequence (right). The ground truth activations are marked with blue crosses. (c) shows the firingof the extracted cells in the ground truth motifs (top), the motifs identified by SCC (middle) and themotifs found with LeMoNADe (bottom).
Figure 6: Result from hippocampal slice culture datasets 1 (top) and 2 (bottom). The colors in (a) areinverted compared to the standard visualization of calcium imaging data for better visibility. In (c)activations are thresholded to 70% of the maximum activation for each motif. In (d) the manuallyselected frames of motif 0 highlight the temporal structure of the motif.
Figure 7: Top: Bootstrap distribution for similarity between random patterns. Shown is a samplefrom the BS distribution (blue) and the 95% significance threshold (red). Bottom: Distributionfor similarity between patterns found on data which contained repeating motifs. Shown are thesimilarities between motifs found with LeMoNADe (lime green) and the ground truth motifs for thesynthetic datasets discussed in the paper, which contained repeating motifs. The 95% significancethreshold of the corresponding BS distribution is indicated as vertical red line.
Figure 8: Color-coded difference between discovered motifs and intensity modulated synchronousfiring. Red color indicates negative differences, blue positive differences and white zero difference.
Figure 9: Result obtained on the real dataset 2 after manual cell extraction with SCC (a) and thetraces manually extracted from the motif found with LeMoNADe on the original video data (b).
Figure 10: Results from the exemplary synthetic dataset discussed in the paper, (a) shows the three ground truth motifs. We also show the results of our analysis withfixed motif length (F = 31) for the different numbers of motifs M = I (b), M = 3 (c) and M = 5 (d).
Figure 11: Results from dataset 1 with fixed motif length (F = 21) for the different numbers of motifs (a) M = 1, (b) Mframe 6frame 7frame 8frame 13frameframerame 16frame 1/rrame 192, (c) M = 3, and (d) M = 5.
Figure 12: Results from dataset 1 with fixed number of motifs (M = 3) for the different motif lengths (a) F = 21 and (b) F = 31.
Figure 13: Motifs found on real dataset 2 for small changes of a. The parameter a was increasedin steps of 0.003 from a = 0.001 (a) to a = 0.010 (d) and in steps of 0.030 from a = 0.010 (d) toaa = 0.100 (g).
Figure 14: Motifs found on real dataset 2 for huge changes of a. The parameter a was increased bytwo orders of magnitude in each step from a = 10-4 (a) to a = 1 (c).
Figure 15: Motifs found on real dataset 2 for small changes of βKL. The parameter βKLin steps of 0.03 from βKL = 0.01 (a) to βKL = 0.19 (g).
Figure 16: Motifs found on real dataset 2 for huge changes of βKL. The parameter βKL was increasedby two orders of magnitude in each step from βKL = 10-3 (a) to βKL = 10 (c).
