Figure 1: Goal conditioned ’U’ shaped maze and ’S’ shaped maze. For each plot pair, the left illustrates a renderingof the maze type and the right shows the associated success rate throughout training for each method. Each line showsresults averaged over 5 random initializations; the X-axis corresponds to epoch number and shaded regions show standarddeviation. All metrics based on CER reference the performance of agent A.
Figure 2: Comparing CER and ICM with and without HER. Each line shows task success rate averaged over 5 randominitializations. X-axis is epoch number; shaded regions denote standard deviation.
Figure 3: Evaluation of HER with ind-CER across different robotic control environments. Each line shows resultsaveraged over 5 random initializations. X-axis shows epoch number; shaded regions denote standard deviation.
Figure 4: Illustration of the automatically generated curriculum between A and B on ‘U‘ shaped AntMaze task. Fromleft to right are success rate of ind-CER, effect ratio of ind-CER, success rate of int-CER, and effect ratio of int-CER.
Figure 5: State visitation frequency on ’U’ maze. Top row is from after 5 epochs; bottom row from after 35. Blue on thecolormap denotes no visitation. The start and goal locations are labeled with the blue and green markers, respectively.
Figure 6: State visitation difference on ’U’ maze. Left plots compare CER against HER; right plots compare the twoCER agents. Each plot illustrates the difference in visitation, with red indicating more visitation by CER(A). Note: here,the “CER” agent is trained with CER+HER.
Figure 7: Robotics control environments used in our experimentsFetchPush	FetchSlidethe agent is always initialized at position (0, 0), and can move in any direction as long as it is not obstructedby a wall. The x- and y-axis locations of the target ball are sampled uniformly from [-5, 20], [-5, 20],respectively.
Figure 8: Performance on FetchSlide (top) and HandManipulatePenFull (bottom) for different batch-size multiplierswhen training using HER (left columns) or HER+CER (middle, right columns). Middle plots show the performance ofagent A and, in the right plots, performance of agent B is shown for reference.
