Figure 1: Place cells and grid cells. (a) The rat is moving within a square region. (b) The activity of a neuronis recorded. (c) When the rat moves around (the curve is the trajectory), each place cell fires at a particularlocation, but each grid cell fires at multiple locations that form a hexagon grid. (d) The place cells and gridcells exist in the brains of both rat and human. (Source of pictures: internet)Figure 1(a) shows Dr. May-Britt Moser, who together with Dr. Edvard Moser, won the 2014 NobelPrize for Physiology or Medicine, for their discovery of the grid cells (Hafting et al. (2005); Fyhnet al. (2008); Yartsev et al. (2011); Killian et al. (2012); Jacobs et al. (2013); Doeller et al. (2010))* Equal contributions.
Figure 2: Grid cells form a high-dimensional vector representation of 2D self-position. Three sub-models: (1) Local motion is modeled by vector-matrix multiplication. (2) Angle between two nearbyvectors magnifies the Euclidean distance. (3) Inner product between any two vectors measures theadjacency which is a kernel function of the Euclidean distance.
Figure 3: Learned units of a single block with fixed α. (a) Learned single block with 6 units. Every row showsthe learned units with a given α. (b) Learned single block with 100 units and α = 72.
Figure 4: (a) Response maps of learned units of the vector representation and learned scaling parameters αk .
Figure 5: (a) Path integral prediction. The black line depicts the real path while red dotted line is the predictedpath by the learned model. (b) Mean square error over time step. The error is average over 1, 000 episodes.
Figure 6: (a) Planning examples with different motion ranges. Red star represents the destination y and greendots represent the planned position {x0 + it=1 ∆xi }. (b) Planning examples with a dot obstacle. Left figureshows the effect of changing scaling parameter a, while right figure shows the effect of changing annealingparameter b. (c) Planning examples with obstacles mimicking walls, large objects and simple mazes.
Figure 7: Response maps of learned single block units with different block sizes(j) Block size = 40Figure 7 displays the response maps of the learned single block units with different block sizes. Forblock sizes 4 and 5, the learned maps show square lattice patterns. For block sizes greater than orequal to 6, the learned maps show hexagon lattice patterns.
Figure 9: Learned multiple block units and metrics with different shapes of the areaC.1 Coupling two grid systemsThe egocentric motion consists of angular velocity in the change of head direction and the spatialvelocity along the current head direction. We couple two grid systems, one for head direction andthe other for the spatial position. For notational simplicity, we put the “hat” notation on top of v andM notation to denote the vector and matrix for the head direction.
Figure 10: (a) Autocorrelograms of the learned units’ response maps. Gridness scores are calculatedbased on the autocorrelograms. A unit is classified as a grid cell if the gridness score is larger than 0.
Figure 11: Ablation study of the components in the training loss. (a) Learn the model using onlythe localization loss with global adjacency. (b) Learn the model using only the localization loss withlocal adjacency. (c) Using global adjacency and motion loss, leaving out local adjacency.
Figure 12:	Learned units by dropping the parametrization and the block diagonal assumption of themotion matrix M (∆x).
Figure 13:	(a) Response curves of learned units in the head direction model, v(θ). Each block shows the unitsbelonging to the same sub-vector in the model. The horizontal axis represents the angle within a range of [0,2π], while the vertical axis indicates the values of responses. (b) Response maps of the learned multiple blockunits of the self-position model, v(x), for x ∈ [0, 1]2.
Figure 14: Learned units of a single block with fixed α in 3D environment. Every row shows the learned unitswith a given α.
Figure 15: Examples of 3D path integral with duration T = 30.
Figure 16: Examples of 3D simple path planning, where the agent is capable of planning a direct trajectory.
Figure 17: Examples of 3D path planning with a cuboid obstacle.
