Compressive Transformers for Long-Range
Sequence Modelling
Jack W. Rae菜 f t Anna Potapenko* f	Siddhant M. Jayakumarf	Chloe Hillierf
Timothy P. Lillicrap #
Ab stract
We present the Compressive Transformer, an attentive sequence model which
compresses past memories for long-range sequence learning. We find the Com-
pressive Transformer obtains state-of-the-art language modelling results in the
WikiText-103 and Enwik8 benchmarks, achieving 17.1 ppl and 0.97 bpc respec-
tively. We also find it can model high-frequency speech effectively and can be
used as a memory mechanism for RL, demonstrated on an object matching task.
To promote the domain of long-range sequence learning, we propose a new open-
vocabulary language modelling benchmark derived from books, PG-19.
1	Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to remember information over long time horizons. When reading
a book, we build up a compressed representation of the past narrative, such as the characters and
events that have built up the story so far. We can do this even if they are separated by thousands
of words from the current text, or long stretches of time between readings. During daily life, we
make use of memories at varying time-scales: from locating the car keys, placed in the morning,
to recalling the name of an old friend from decades ago. These feats of memorisation are not
achieved by storing every sensory glimpse throughout one’s lifetime, but via lossy compression. We
aggressively select, filter, or integrate input stimuli based on factors of surprise, perceived danger,
or repetition — amongst other signals (Richards and Frankland, 2017).
Memory systems in artificial neural networks began with very compact representations of the past.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs, Rumelhart et al. (1986)) learn to represent the history of obser-
vations in a compressed state vector. The state is compressed because it uses far less space than the
history of observations —the model only preserving information that is pertinent to the optimization
of the loss. The LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) is perhaps the most ubiquitous RNN
variant; it uses learned gates on its state vector to determine what information is stored or forgotten
from memory.
However since the LSTM, there has been great benefit discovered in not bottlenecking all histori-
cal information in the state, but instead in keeping past activations around in an external memory
and attending to them. The Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a sequence model which stores
the hidden activation of every time-step, and integrates this information using an attention operator
(Bahdanau et al., 2014). The Transformer will thus represent the past with a tensor (depth × mem-
ory size × dimension) of past observations that is, in practice, an order of magnitude larger than an
LSTM’s hidden state. With this granular memory, the Transformer has brought about a step-change
in state-of-the-art performance, within machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), language mod-
elling (Dai et al., 2019; Shoeybi et al., 2019), video captioning (Zhou et al., 2018), and a multitude
of language understanding benchmarks (Devlin et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019) amongst others.
One drawback in storing everything is the computational cost of attending to every time-step and
the storage cost of preserving this large memory. Several works have focused on reducing the
computational cost of attention with sparse access mechanisms (Rae et al., 2016; Child et al., 2019;
* Authors contributed equally, f DeePMind, London, UK. ∣ CoMPLEX, Computer Science, University Col-
lege London, UK. Please direct correspondence to {jwrae, apotapenko}@google.com.
1
Sukhbaatar et al., 2019; Lample et al., 2019). However sparse attention does not solve the storage
problem, and often requires custom sparse kernels for efficient implementation. Instead we look
back to the notion of compactly representing the past. We show this can be built with simple dense
linear-algebra components, such as convolutions, and can reduce both the space and compute cost
of our models.
We propose the Compressive Transformer, a simple extension to the Transformer which maps past
hidden activations (memories) to a smaller set of compressed representations (compressed memo-
ries). The Compressive Transformer uses the same attention mechanism over its set of memories
and compressed memories, learning to query both its short-term granular memory and longer-term
coarse memory. We observe this improves the modelling of text, achieving state-of-the-art results
in character-based language modelling — 0.97 bpc on Enwik8 from the Hutter Prize (Hutter, 2012)
— and word-level language modelling — 17.1 perplexity on WikiText-103 (Merity et al., 2016).
Specifically, we see the Compressive Transformer improves the modelling of rare words.
We show the Compressive Transformer works not only for language, but can also model the
waveform of high-frequency speech with a trend of lower likelihood than the TransformerXL and
Wavenet (Oord et al., 2016) when trained over 400,000 steps. We also show the Compressive Trans-
former can be used as a memory component within an RL agent, IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018),
and can successfully compress and make use of past observations.
Furthermore we present a new book-level language-modelling benchmark PG-19, extracted from
texts in Project Gutenberg1, to further promote the direction of long-context sequence modelling.
This is over double the size of existing LM benchmarks and contains text with much longer contexts.
2	Related Work
There have been a variety of recent attempts to extend the range of attention, particularly in the
Transformer, or to replace the attention operation with something less expensive. Wu et al. (2019)
show that a convolution-like operator that runs in linear time can actually exceed the performance
of the quadratic-time self-attention layer in the Transformer at sentence-to-sentence translation and
sentence-level language modelling. However such a mechanism inhibits the flow of information
across a large number of time-steps for a given layer, and has not shown to be beneficial for long-
range sequence modelling.
Dai et al. (2019) propose the TransformerXL, which keeps past activations around in memory. They
also propose a novel relative positional embedding scheme which they see outperforms the Trans-
former’s original absolute positional system. Our model incorporates both of these ideas, the use of
a memory to preserve prior activations and their relative positional embedding scheme.
The Sparse Transformer (Child et al., 2019) uses fixed sparse attention masks to attend to roughly
√n locations in memory. This approach still requires keeping all memories around during training,
however with careful re-materialization of activations and custom kernels, the authors are able to
train the model with a reasonable budget of memory and compute. When run on Enwik8, the much
larger attention window of 8, 000 improves model performance, but overall it does not significantly
outperform a simpler TransformerXL with a much smaller attention window.
The use of dynamic attention spans is explored in Sukhbaatar et al. (2019). Different attention heads
can learn to have shorter or longer spans of attention — and they observe this achieves state-of-
the-art in character-based language modelling. This idea could easily be combined with our contri-
bution — a compressive memory. However an efficient implementation is not possible on current
dense-linear-algebra accelerators, such as Google’s TPUs, due to the need for dynamic and sparse
computation. Our approach builds on simple dense linear algebra components, such as convolutions.
3	Model
We present the Compressive Transformer, a long-range sequence model which compacts past acti-
vations into a compressed memory2 . The Compressive Transformer is a variant of the Transformer
1Project Gutenberg: https://www.gutenberg.org/
2A TF implementation can be found in Sonnet: https://github.com/deepmind/sonnet
2
Compressed Memory
√^Λfc(3)
Memory
Sequence
-I~I_H÷t
Figure 1: The Compressive Transformer keeps a fine-grained memory of past activations, which are
then compressed into coarser compressed memories. The above model has three layers, a sequence
length ns = 3, memory size nm = 6, compressed memory size ncm = 6. The highlighted memories
are compacted, with a compression function fc per layer, to a single compressed memory — instead
of being discarded at the next sequence. In this example, the rate of compression c = 3.
(Vaswani et al., 2017), a deep residual network which only uses attention to propagate information
over time (namely multi-head attention). We build on the ideas of the TransformerXL (Dai et al.,
2019) which maintains a memory of past activations at each layer to preserve a longer history of con-
text. The TransformerXL discards past activations when they become sufficiently old (controlled by
the size of the memory). The key principle of the Compressive Transformer is to compress these old
memories, instead of discarding them, and store them in an additional compressed memory.
3.1 Description
We define nm and ncm to be the number of respective memory and compressive memory slots in the
model per layer. The overall input sequence S = x1, x2, . . . , x|s| represents input observations (e.g.
tokens from a book). These are split into fixed-size windows of size ns for the model to process in
parallel. The model observes x = xt , . . . , xt+ns at time t, which we refer to as the sequence (e.g.
in Figure 1). As the model moves to the next sequence, its ns hidden activations are pushed into a
fixed-sized FIFO memory (like the TransformerXL) of size nm. The oldest ns activations in memory
are evicted, but unlike the TransformerXL we do not discard them. Instead we apply a compression
operation, f : Rns ×d → Rb ns c×d, mapping the n oldest memories to [詈 C compressed memories
which we then store in a secondary FIFO compressed memory of size ncm . d denotes the hidden
size of activations and c refers to the compression rate, a higher value indicates more coarse-grained
compressed memories. The overall temporal range of the model becomes l X (n + nm, + C * ncm),
where l is the number of layers — as discussed in Supplementary Section A. The full architecture is
described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Compressive Transformer
At time zero
1: mo J 0	// Initialize memory to zeros (l × nm, × d)
2: cmo J 0	// Initialize compressed memory to zeros (l × ncm × d)
At time t
3: h* (1) 11 J xWemb	// Embed input sequence(ns × d)
4: for layer i = 1, 2, . . . , l do
5:	mem(i) J concat(cm(ti), m(ti))	// ((ncm + nm) × d)
6:	a(i)	J multihead_attention(i) (h⑴,memti))	// MHA over both mem types (n§	×	d)
7:	a(i)	J layer_norm(a(i) + h(i))	// Regular skip + layernorm (ncm	×	d)
8: old_mem(i) J mti) [: n§]	// Oldest memories to be forgotten (n × d)
9: new_cm⑴ J fCi) (old_mem(i))	// Compress oldest memories by factor C ([nsC × d)
10: m(ti+) 1 J concat(m(ti), h(i))[-nm :]	// Update memory (nm × d)
11: Cmti) J COnCat(Cmti), new-cm(i))[-ncm ：] // Update compressed memory gm × d)
12: h(i+1) J layer_norm(mlp(i) (a(i)) + a⑴)	// Mixing MLP (n§ × d)
3
Algorithm 2 Attention-Reconstruction Loss
1:	Lattn . 0
2:	for layer i = 1, 2, . . . , l do
3:	h⑴ J stop_gradient(h⑴)	// Stop compression grads from passing...
4:	old_mem(i) J stop_gradient(old_mem⑴)	// ...into transformer network.
5:	Q, K, V J stop_gradient(attention params at layer i)	// Re-use attention weight matrices.
6:	def attn(h, m) J σ((hQ) (mK))(mV)	// Use content-based attention (no relative).
7:	new_cm⑴ J fCi) (old_mem(i))	// Compression network (to be optimized).
8:	Lattn j Lattn + ||attn(h(i),old_mem(i)) — attn(h⑴，new-cm(i))∣∣2
3.2 Compression Functions and Losses
For choices of compression functions fc we consider (1) max/mean pooling, where the kernel and
stride is set to the compression rate c;	(2) 1D convolution also with kernel & stride set to c;
(3)	dilated convolutions; (4) most-used where the memories are sorted by their average attention
(usage) and the most-used are preserved. The pooling is used as a fast and simple baseline. The most-
used compression scheme is inspired from the garbage collection mechanism in the Differentiable
Neural Computer (Graves et al., 2016) where low-usage memories are erased. The convolutional
compression functions contain parameters which require training.
One can train the compression network using gradients from the loss; however for very old memories
this requires backpropagating-through-time (BPTT) over long unrolls. As such we also consider
some local auxiliary compression losses. We consider an auto-encoding loss where we reconstruct
the original memories from the compressed memories Lae = ||old_mem⑴ —g(new.cm(i))∣∣2,
where g : R等×d → Rns×d is learned. This is a lossless compression objective — it attempts
to retain all information in memory. We also consider an attention-reconstruction loss described
in Algorithm 2 which reconstructs the content-based attention over memory, with content-based
attention over the compressed memories. This is a lossy objective, as information that is no longer
attended to can be discarded, and we found this worked best. We stop compression loss gradients
from passing into the main network as this prevents learning. Instead the Transformer optimizes
the task objective and the compression network optimizes the compression objective conditioned on
task-relevant representations; there is no need to mix the losses with a tuning constant.
4	PG-19 Benchmark
As models begin to incorporate longer-range memories, it is important to train and benchmark them
on data containing larger contexts. Natural language in the form of text provides us with a vast
repository of data containing long-range dependencies, that is easily accessible. We propose a new
language modelling benchmark, PG-19, using text from books extracted from Project Gutenberg 3.
We select Project Gutenberg books which were published over 100 years old, i.e. before 1919
(hence the name PG-19) to avoid complications with international copyright, and remove short texts.
The dataset contains 28, 752 books, or 11GB of text — which makes it over double the size of
BookCorpus and Billion Word Benchmark.
4.1	Related Datasets
The two most benchmarked word-level language modelling datasets either stress the modelling of
stand-alone sentences (Billion Word Benchmark from Chelba et al. (2013)) or the modelling of a
small selection of short news articles (Penn Treebank processed by Mikolov et al. (2010)). Merity
et al. (2016) proposed the WikiText-103 dataset, which contains text from a high quality subset of
English-language wikipedia articles. These articles are on average 3, 600 words long. This dataset
has been a popular recent LM benchmark due to the potential to exploit longer-range dependencies
(Grave et al., 2016; Rae et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2018b). However recent Transformer models, such
3PG-19 is available at https://github.com/deepmind/pg19
4
Table 1: Comparison to existing popular language modelling benchmarks.
	Avg. length (words)	Train Size	Vocab	Type
1B Word	27	4.15GB	793K	News (sentences)
Penn Treebank	355	5.1MB	10K	News (articles)
WikiText-103	3.6K	515MB	267K	Wikipedia (articles)
PG-19	69K	10.9GB	(open)	Books
as the TransformerXL (Dai et al., 2019) appear to be able to exploit temporal dependencies on the
order of several thousand words. This motivates a larger dataset with longer contexts.
Books are a natural choice of long-form text, and provide us with stylistically rich and varied natural
language. Texts extracted from books have been used for prior NLP benchmarks; such as the Chil-
dren’s Book Test (Hill et al., 2015) and LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016). These benchmarks use
text from Project Gutenberg, an online repository of books with expired US copyright, and Book-
Corpus (Zhu et al., 2015), a prior dataset of 11K unpublished (at time of authorship) books. CBT
and LAMBADA contain extracts from books, with a specific task of predicting held-out words. In
the case of LAMBADA the held-out word is specifically designed to be predictable for humans with
access to the full textual context — but difficult to guess with only a local context.
CBT and LAMBADA are useful for probing the linguistic intelligence of models, but are not ideal
for training long-range language models from scratch as they truncate text extracts to at most a
couple of paragraphs, and discard a lot of the books’ text. There has been prior work on training
models on book data using BookCorpus directly (e.g. BERT from Devlin et al. (2018)) however
BookCorpus is no longer distributed due to licensing issues, and the source of data is dynamically
changing — which makes exact benchmarking difficult over time.
The NarrativeQA Book Comprehension Task (Kocisky et al., 2018) uses Project GUtenberg texts
paired with Wikipedia articles, which can be used as summaries. Due to the requirement of needing
a corresponding summary, NarrativeQA contains a smaller selection of books: 1,527 versus the
28,752 books in PG-19. However it is reasonable that PG-19 may be useful for pre-training book
summarisation models.
4.2	Statistics
A brief comparison of PG-19 to other LM datasets can be found in Table 1. We intentionally do not
limit the vocabulary by unk-ing rare words, and release the dataset as an open-vocabulary bench-
mark. To compare models we propose to continue measuring the word-level perplexity. This can
still be computed for any chosen character-based, byte-based or subword-based scheme. To do this,
one calculates the total cross-entropy loss L = - Pt log(pt |p<t) over the given validation or test
subset using a chosen tokenization scheme, and then one normalizes this value by the number of
words: L/nwords where nwords is the total number of words in the given subset, taken from Table
2. The word-level perplexity is thus eL/nwords . For sake of model comparisons, it is important to
use the exact number of words computed in Table 2 as the normalisation constant.
Alongside quantitative analyses, we build an LDA topic model (Blei et al., 2003) for a qualitative
inspection of the text. We present key words for several topics in the Supplementary Table 10. These
topics include art, education, naval exploration, geographical description, war, ancient civilisations,
and more poetic topics concerning the human condition — love, society, religion, virtue etc. This
contrasts to the more objective domains of Wikipedia and news corpora.
5	Experiments
We optimised all models with Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014). We used a learning rate schedule
with a linear warmup from 1e-6 to 3e-4 and a cosine decay back down to 1e-n6. For character-
based LM we used 4, 000 warmup steps with 100, 000 decay steps, and for word-based LM we used
16, 000 warmup steps with 500, 000 decay steps. We found that decreasing the optimisation update
frequency helped (see Section 5.5.1), namely we only applied parameter updates every 4 steps after
60, 000 iterations. However we found the models would optimise well for a range of warmup/warm-
5
Table 2: PG-19 statistics split by subsets.	Table 3: Eval. perplexities on PG-19.
	Train	Valid.	Test	Valid.		Test
# books	28,602	50	100	36L TransformerXL	45.5	36.3
# words	1,973,136,207	3,007,061	6,966,499	36L Compressive Transf.	43.4	33.6
Table 4: State-of-the-art results on EnWik8.
Model	BPC
7L LSTM (Graves, 2013)	1.67
LN HyperNetworks Ha et al. (2016)	1.34
LN HM-LSTM Chung et al. (2016)	1.32
ByteNet (Kalchbrenner et al., 2016)	1.31
RHN Zilly et al. (2017)	1.27
mLSTM Krause et al. (2016)	1.24
64L Transf. Al-Rfou et al. (2019)	1.06
24L TXL (Dai et al., 2019)	0.99
Sparse Transf. (Child et al., 2019)	0.991
Adaptive Transf. (Sukhbaatar et al., 2019)	0.98
24LTXL(ours)	0.98
24L Compressive Transformer	0.97
Table 5: Compression approaches on Enwik8.
Compression fn	Compression loss	BPC
Conv	BPTT	0.996
Max Pooling	N/A	0.986
Conv	Auto-encoding	0.984
Mean Pooling	N/A	0.982
Most-used	N/A	0.980
Dilated conv	Attention	0.977
Conv	Attention	0.973
doWn values. We clipped the gradients to have a norm of at most 0.1, Which Was crucial to successful
optimisation.
5.1	PG-19
We benchmark the Compressive Transformer against the TransformerXL on the newly proposed PG-
19 books dataset. Because it is open-vocabulary, we train a subword vocabulary of size 32000 with
SubwordTextEncoder from the tfds package in TensorFlow and use the dataset statistics to compute
word-level perplexity, as described in Section 4.2. We train a 36 layer Compressive Transformer with
a window size of 512, both memory and compressed memory size of 512, and compression rate C =
2. We compare this to a 36 layer TransformerXL trained with window size 512 and attention window
1024. The model was trained on 256 TPUv3 cores with a total batch size of 512 and converged after
processing around 100 billion subword tokens. We display the results in Table 3 where we see the
Compressive Transformer obtains a test perplexity of 33.6 versus the TransformerXL’s 36.3. Despite
the dataset size, it is clearly a challenging domain. This can suit as a first baseline on the proposed
long-range language modelling benchmark. We show samples from this model in Supplementary
Section F. The model is able to generate long-form narrative of varying styles: from character
dialogue, first person diary entries, to descriptive third-person text.
5.2	Enwik8
We compare the TransformerXL and the Compressive Transformer on the standard character-level
language modelling benchmark Enwiki8 taken from the Hutter Prize (Hutter, 2012), which contains
100M bytes of unprocessed Wikipedia text. We select the first 90MB for training, 5MB for valida-
tion, and the latter 5MB for testing — as per convention. We train 24-layer models with a sequence
window size of 768. During training, we set the TransformerXL’s memory size to 2304, and for
the Compressive Transformer we use memory of size 768 and compressed memory of size 1152
with compression rate C = 3. During evaluation, we increased the TransformerXL memory size
to 4096 and the compressed memory in our model to 3072 (after sweeping over the validation set),
obtaining the numbers reported in Table 4. We show the effect of scaling the compressed memory
size and evaluation performance in Supplementary Section C. The proposed model achieves the new
state-of-the-art on this dataset with 0.97 bits-per-character.
We compare compression functions and the use of auxiliary losses in Table 5. We sweep over
compression rates of 2, 3, and 4 and report results with the best performing value for each row.
BPTT signifies that no auxiliary compression loss was used to train the network other than the
6
Table 6: Validation and test perplexities on WikiText-103.
	Valid.	Test
LSTM (Graves etal., 2014)	-	48.7
Temporal CNN (Bai et al., 2018a)	-	45.2
GCNN-14 (Dauphin et al., 2016)	-	37.2
Quasi-RNN Bradbury et al. (2016)	32	33
RMC (Santoro et al., 2018)	30.8	31.9
LSTM+Hebb. (Rae et al., 2018)	29.0	29.2
Transformer (Baevski and Auli, 2019)	-	18.7
18L TransformerXL, M=384 (Dai et al., 2019)	-	18.3
18L TransformerXL, M=1024 (ours)	-	18.1
18L Compressive Transformer, M=1024	16.0	17.1
overall training loss. To feed gradients into the compression function we unrolled the model over
double the sequence length and halved the batch size to fit the larger unroll into memory.
5.3	Wikitext- 1 03
We train an eighteen-layered Compressive Transformer on the closed-vocabulary word-level lan-
guage modelling benchmark WikiText-103, which contains articles from Wikipedia. We train the
model with a compressed memory size, memory size, and a sequence window size all equal to 512.
We trained the model over 64 Tensor Processing Units (TPU) v3 with a batch size of 2 per core —
making for a total batch size of 128. The model converged in a little over 12 hours. We found the
single-layer convolution worked best, with a compression rate of c = 4. This model obtained 17.6
perplexity on the test set. By tuning the memory size over the validation set — setting the memory
size to 500, and compressed memory size to 1, 500 — we obtain 17.1 perplexity. This is 1.2 per-
plexity points over prior state of the art, and means the model places a ≈ 5% higher probability on
the correct word over the prior SotA TransformerXL.
It is worth noting that in Table 6 we do not list methods that use additional training data, or that make
use of test-time labels to continue training the model on the test set (known as dynamic evaluation
(Graves, 2013)). If we incorporate a very naive dynamic evaluation approach of loading a model
checkpoint and continuing training over one epoch of the test set, then we obtain a test perplexity
of 16.1. This is slightly better than the published 16.4 from Krause et al. (2019) — which uses a
more sophisticated dynamic evaluation approach on top of the TransformerXL. However in most
settings, one does not have access to test-time labels — and thus we do not focus on this setting.
Furthermore there has been great progress in showing that more data equates to much better lan-
guage modelling; Shoeybi et al. (2019) find a large transformer 8B-parameter transformer trained
on 170GB of text obtains 10.7 word-level perplexity on WikiText-103. However it is not clear to
what extent the WikiText-103 test set may be leaked inside these larger training corpora. For clarity
of model comparisons, we compare to published results trained on the WikiText-103 training set.
We break perplexity down by word frequency in Table 7 and see the Compressive Trans-
former makes only a small modelling improvement for frequent words (2.6% over the Trans-
formerXL baseline) but obtains a much larger improvement of ≈ 20% for infrequent words. Fur-
thermore, we see 10X improvement in modelling rare words over the prior state-of-the-art LSTM
language model published in 2018 — which demonstrates the rate of progress in this area.
5.4	Compressibility of layers
We can use compression to better understand the model’s mode of operation. We inspect how
compressible Transformer’s activations are as they progress through higher layers in the network.
One may expect representations to become more difficult to compress at higher layers, if more
semantic information is represented there. We monitor the compression loss at each layer of our
best-performing Compressive Transformer models trained on Enwik8 and WikiText-103 and display
these in Supplementary Section B Figure 6. We note that the compression loss is about one order of
magnitude higher for word-level language modelling (WikiText-103) over character-level langauge
7
Table 7: WikiText-103 test perplexity broken down by word frequency buckets. The most frequent
bucket is words which appear in the training set more than 10, 000 times, displayed on the left. For
reference, a uniform model would have perplexity |V | = 2.6e5 for all frequency buckets. *LSTM
comparison from Rae et al. (2018)
	> 10K	1K-10K	100 - 1K	< 100	All
LSTM*	12.1	219	1,197	9,725	36.4
TransformerXL (ours)	7.8	61.2	188	1,123	18.1
Compressive Transformer	7.6	55.9	158	937	17.1
Relative gain over TXL	2.6%	9.5%	21%	19.9%	5.8%
Figure 2: Attention weight on Enwik8. Av-
erage attention weight from the sequence over
the compressed memory (oldest), memory, and
sequence (newest) respectively. The sequence
self-attention is causally masked, so more at-
tention is placed on earlier elements in the se-
quence. There is an increase in attention at the
transition from memory to compressed memory.
Training iterations
Figure 3: Learning rate analysis. Reducing the
learning rate (e.g. to zero) during training (on
Enwik8) harms training performance. Reduc-
ing the frequency of optimisation updates (ef-
fectively increasing the batch size) is preferable.
modelling (Enwik8). Furthermore the first layer of the Transformer is highly compressible. However
there is not a clear trend of compression cost increasing with layer depth.
5.5	Attention
We inspect where the network is attending to on average, to determine whether it is using its com-
pressed memory. We average the attention weight over a sample of 20, 000 sequences from a trained
model on Enwik8. We aggregate the attention into eighteen buckets, six for each of the compressed
memory, memory, and sequence respectively. We set the size of the sequence, memory and com-
pressed memory all to be 768. We plot this average attention weight per bucket in Figure 2 with a
1σ standard error. We see most of the attention is placed on the current sequence; with a greater
weight placed on earlier elements of the sequence due to the causal self-attention mechanism which
masks future attention weights. We also observe there is an increase in attention from the oldest
activations stored in the regular memory, to the activations stored in the compressed memory. This
goes against the trend of older memories being accessed less frequently — and gives evidence
that the network is learning to preserve salient information.
5.5.1	Optimisation Schedule
We make an observation about an interesting but undesirable meta-learning phenomenon during
long-context training. When the learning rate is tuned to be much smaller (or set to zero) during
training, performance degrades drastically both for the TransformerXL and the Compressive Trans-
former. This is displayed in Figure 3.
Usually we consider distributional shift from the training data to the test data, but we can also
observe a shift in the model when transferring from a training to evaluation mode (even when the
model is evaluated on the training data). In this case, this is due to the online updating of parameters
whilst processing long contiguous articles. We would like the model to generalise well to scenarios
where it is not continuously optimised. Updating the parameters only at article boundaries (and then
8
resetting the state) could be one solution for long-range memory models, but this would slow down
learning significantly.
Instead, we propose reducing the frequency of optimisation updates during training. We find this
allows for the best of both worlds — fast initial learning with frequent updates, and better gen-
eralisation near the end of training with less frequent updates (e.g. every 4 steps). Reducing the
optimisation frequency increases the effective batch size, which has also been shown to be prefer-
able to learning rate decay in image modelling (Smith et al., 2018). We observed a final performance
improvement in our TransformerXL baseline on Enwik8, from 0.995 — which approximately repli-
cates the published result — to 0.984 — which matches the most recent SotA architecture. We note,
the additional space and compute cost of accumulating gradients is negligible across iterations, so
there was no performance regression in using this scheme.
5.6	Speech
We train the Compressive Transformer on the waveform of speech to assess its performance on
different modalities. Speech is interesting because it is sampled at an incredibly high frequency, but
we know it contains a lot of information on the level of phonemes and entire phrases.
To encourage long-term reasoning, we refrain from conditioning the model on speaker identity or
text features, but focus on unconditional speech modelling. We train the model on 24.6 hours of
24kHz North American speech data. We chunk the sequences into windows of size 3840, roughly
80ms of audio, and compare a 20-layer Compressive Transformer to a 20-layer TransformerXL
and a 30-layer WaveNet model (Oord et al., 2016) — a state-of-the-art audio generative model
used to serve production speech synthesis applications at Google (Oord et al., 2018). All networks
have approximately 40M parameters, as WaveNet is more parameter-efficient per layer. We train
each network with 32 V100 GPUs, and a batch size of 1 per core (total batch size of 32) using
synchronous training.
WaveNet processes an entire chunk in parallel, however the TransformerXL and Compressive Trans-
former are trained with a window size of 768 and a total memory size of 1, 568 (for the Compres-
sive Transformer we use 768 memory + 768 compressed). We thus unroll the model over the se-
quence. Despite this sequential unroll, the attention-based models train at only half the speed of
WaveNet. We see the test-set negative-log-likelihood in Figure 4, and observe that a Compressive
Transformer with a compression rate of 4 is able to outperform the TransformerXL and maintain
a slim advantage over WaveNet. However we only trained models for at most one week (with
32GPUs) and it would be advantageous to continue training until full convergence — before defini-
tive conclusions are made.
5.7	Reinforcement Learning
Compression is a good fit for video input sequences because subsequent frames have high mutual
information. Here we do not test out the Compressive Transformer on video, but progress straight to
a reinforcement learning agent task that receives a video stream of visual observations — but must
ultimately learn to use its memory to reason over a policy.
We test the Compressive Transformer as a drop-in replacement to an LSTM in the IMPALA setup
(Espeholt et al., 2018). Otherwise, we use the same training framework and agent architecture as
described in the original work with a fixed learning rate of 1.5e-5 and entropy cost coefficient of
2e-3. We test the Compressive Transformer on a challenging memory task within the DMLab-30
(Beattie et al., 2016) domain, roomsselect_nonmatching_object. This requires the agent to explore
a room in a visually rich 3D environment and remember the object present. The agent can then
advance to a second room where it must select the object not present in the original room. This
necessitates that the agent both remember events far in the past, and also learn to efficiently reason
about them.
We fix both the memory and compressed memory sizes to 64. In Figure 5, we present results for a
range of compression rates, averaged over 3 seeds. We see that the best performing agents endowed
with the Compressive Transformer are able to solve the task to human-level. We note that the model
with compression rate 1 is unable to learn the task to the same proficiency. The speed of learning
and stability Seem to increase proportionally with higher rates of compression (UP to a limit) 一 i.e.
9
Training Iterations
Figure 4: Speech Modelling. We see the Com-
pressive Transformer is able to obtain competi-
tive results against the state-of-the-art WaveNet
in the modelling of raw speech sampled at
24kHz.
Figure 5: Vision and RL. We see the Com-
pressive Transformer integrates visual informa-
tion across time within an IMPALA RL agent,
trained on an object matching task.
the effective memory window of the agent - and We find compression rate 4 to once again be the
best performing. We see this as a promising sign that the architecture is able to efficiently learn,
and suitably use, compressed representations of its visual input and hope to test this more widely in
future work.
6	Conclusion
In this paper we explore the notion of compression as a means of extending the temporal receptive
field of Transformer-based sequence models. We see a benefit to this approach in the domain of
text, with the Compressive Transformer outperforming existing architectures at long-range language
modelling. To continue innovation in this area, we also propose a new book-level LM benchmark,
PG-19. This may be used to compare long-range language models, or to pre-train on other long-
range reasoning language tasks, such as NarrativeQA (Kocisky et al., 2018).
We see the idea of compressive memories is applicable not only to the modality of text, but also
audio, in the form of modelling the waveform of speech, and vision, within a reinforcement-learning
agent trained on a maze-like memory task. In both cases, we compare to very strong baselines
(Wavenet (Oord et al., 2016) and IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018)).
The main limitation of this work is additional complexity, if the task one wishes to solve does not
contain long-range reasoning then the Compressive Transformer is unlikely to provide additional
benefit. However as a means of scaling memory and attention, we do think compression is a simpler
approach to dynamic or sparse attention — which often requires custom kernels to make efficient.
One can build effective compression modules from simple neural network components, such as
convolutions. The compression components are immediately efficient to run on GPUs and TPUs.
Memory systems for neural networks began as compressed state representations within RNNs. The
recent wave of progress using attention-based models with deep and granular memories shows us
that it is beneficial to refrain from immediately compressing the past. However we hypothesise that
more powerful models will contain a mixture of granular recent memories and coarser compressed
memories. Future directions could include the investigation of adaptive compression rates by layer,
the use of long-range shallow memory layers together with deep short-range memory, and even the
use of RNNs as compressors. Compressive memories should not be forgotten about just yet.
Acknowledgements
We thank Chris Dyer, Felix Gimeno, and Koray Kavukcuoglu for reviewing the manuscript. We
thank Peter Dayan, Adam Santoro, Jacob Menick, Emilio Parisotto, Hyunjik Kim, Simon Osin-
dero, Sergey Bartunov, David Raposo, and Daan Wierstra for ideas regarding model design. We
thank Yazhe Li and Aaron Van de Oord for their help and advice in instrumenting speech modelling
experiments. Finally, we thank our wider DeepMind colleagues for supporting this project with
stimulating discussions, engineering infrastructure, and positive reinforcement signals.
10
References
R.	Al-Rfou, D. Choe, N. Constant, M. Guo, and L. Jones. Character-level language modeling with
deeper self-attention. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33,
Pages 3159-3166, 2019.
A. Baevski and M. Auli. Adaptive input representations for neural language modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.10853, 2019.
D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
S.	Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun. Convolutional sequence modeling revisited, 2018a. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rk8wKk-R-.
S.	Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun. Trellis networks for sequence modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.06682, 2018b.
C.	Beattie, J. Z. Leibo, D. TePlyashin, T. Ward, M. Wainwright, H. Kuttler, A. Lefrancq, S. Green,
V. Valdes, A. Sadik, J. Schrittwieser, K. Anderson, S. York, M. Cant, A. Cain, A. Bolton, S. Gaffney,
H. King, D. Hassabis, S. Legg, and S. Petersen. DeePmind lab. CoRR, abs/1612.03801, 2016. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.03801.
D.	M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:993-1022,
Mar. 2003. ISSN 1532-4435.
J. Bradbury, S. Merity, C. Xiong, and R. Socher. Quasi-recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01576, 2016.
C. Chelba, T. Mikolov, M. Schuster, Q. Ge, T. Brants, P. Koehn, and T. Robinson. One bil-
lion word benchmark for measuring Progress in statistical language modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.3005, 2013.
R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sParse transformers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
J. Chung, S. Ahn, and Y. Bengio. Hierarchical multiscale recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.01704, 2016.
Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, W. W. Cohen, J. Carbonell, Q. V. Le, and R. Salakhutdinov. Transformer-
xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860,
2019.
Y. N. DauPhin, A. Fan, M. Auli, and D. Grangier. Language modeling with gated convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08083, 2016.
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deeP bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
L. EsPeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih, T. Ward, Y. Doron, V. Firoiu, T. Harley,
I. Dunning, et al. ImPala: Scalable distributed deeP-rl with imPortance weighted actor-learner ar-
chitectures. In International Conference on Machine Learning, Pages 1406-1415, 2018.
E.	Grave, A. Joulin, and N. Usunier. ImProving neural language models with a continuous cache.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04426, 2016.
A. Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850,
2013.
A. Graves, G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka. Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401,
2014.
A. Graves, G. Wayne, M. Reynolds, T. Harley, I. Danihelka, A. Grabska-Barwinska, S. G. Col-
menarejo, E. Grefenstette, T. Ramalho, J. AgaPiou, et al. Hybrid comPuting using a neural network
with dynamic external memory. Nature, 538(7626):471, 2016.
D. Ha, A. Dai, and Q. V. Le. HyPernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106, 2016.
F.	Hill, A. Bordes, S. ChoPra, and J. Weston. The goldilocks PrinciPle: Reading children’s books
with exPlicit memory rePresentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02301, 2015.
11
S.	Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735-1780,
1997.
A. Holtzman, J. Buys, M. Forbes, and Y. Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
M. Hutter. The human knowledge compression contest. URL http://prize. hutter1. net, 6, 2012.
N. Kalchbrenner, L. Espeholt, K. Simonyan, A. v. d. Oord, A. Graves, and K. Kavukcuoglu. Neural
machine translation in linear time. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.10099, 2016.
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
T.	Kocisky, J. Schwarz, P. Blunsom, C. Dyer, K. M. Hermann, G. Melis, and E. Grefenstette. The
narrativeqa reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 6:317-328, 2018.
B.	Krause, L. Lu, I. Murray, and S. Renals. Multiplicative lstm for sequence modelling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.07959, 2016.
B.	Krause, E. Kahembwe, I. Murray, and S. Renals. Dynamic evaluation of transformer language
models. CoRR, abs/1904.08378, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.08378.
G. Lample, A. Sablayrolles, M. Ranzato, L. Denoyer, and H. Jegou. Large memory layers with
product keys. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05242, 2019.
S.	Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
T.	Mikolov, M. Karafiat, L. Burget, J. Cernocky, and S. Khudanpur. Recurrent neural network
based language model. In Eleventh Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association, 2010.
A. Oord, Y. Li, I. Babuschkin, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, K. Kavukcuoglu, G. Driessche, E. Lockhart,
L. Cobo, F. Stimberg, et al. Parallel wavenet: Fast high-fidelity speech synthesis. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3915-3923, 2018.
A. v. d. Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, A. Graves, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Senior,
and K. Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499,
2016.
D. Paperno, G. Kruszewski, A. Lazaridou, Q. Pham, R. Bernardi, S. Pezzelle, M. Baroni, G. Boleda,
R. Fernandez, K. Erk, et al. The lambada dataset: Word prediction requiring a broad discourse
context. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
J. Rae, J. J. Hunt, I. Danihelka, T. Harley, A. W. Senior, G. Wayne, A. Graves, and T. Lillicrap.
Scaling memory-augmented neural networks with sparse reads and writes. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 3621-3629, 2016.
J. W. Rae, C. Dyer, P. Dayan, and T. P. Lillicrap. Fast parametric learning with activation memo-
rization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10049, 2018.
B. A. Richards and P. W. Frankland. The persistence and transience of memory. Neuron, 94(6):
1071-1084, 2017.
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams. Learning representations by back-propagating
errors. Nature, 323(6088):533, 1986.
A. Santoro, R. Faulkner, D. Raposo, J. Rae, M. Chrzanowski, T. Weber, D. Wierstra, O. Vinyals,
R. Pascanu, and T. Lillicrap. Relational recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 7299-7310, 2018.
M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, J. Casper, and B. Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training
multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism, 2019.
S. Smith, P. jan Kindermans, C. Ying, and Q. V. Le. Don’t decay the learning rate, increase the batch
size. 2018. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=B1Yy1BxCZ.
12
S. Sukhbaatar, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin. Adaptive attention span in transformers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07799, 2019.
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polo-
sukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
5998-6008, 2017.
F. Wu, A. Fan, A. Baevski, Y. N. Dauphin, and M. Auli. Pay less attention with lightweight and
dynamic convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10430, 2019.
Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V. Le. Xlnet: Generalized autore-
gressive pretraining for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08237, 2019.
L. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. J. Corso, R. Socher, and C. Xiong. End-to-end dense video captioning with
masked transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pages 8739-8748, 2018.
Y. Zhu, R. Kiros, R. Zemel, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Urtasun, A. Torralba, and S. Fidler. Aligning
books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books.
In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 19-27, 2015.
J. G. Zilly, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutnk and J. Schmidhuber. Recurrent highway networks. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pages 4189-
4198. JMLR. org, 2017.
13
Supplementary Materials
A Temporal Range of the Compressive Transformer
The TransformerXL with a memory of size n has a maximum temporal range of l × n with an
attention cost of O(ns2 + nsn) (see Dai et al. (2019) for a detailed discussion). The Compressive
Transformer now has a maximum temporal range of l X (n + nm, + C * nσm) with an attention cost of
O(ns2 + ns(nm + ncm)). For example, setting ncm = nm = n/2 and c = 3 we obtain a maximum
temporal range that is two times greater than the TransformerXL with an identical attention cost.
Thus if we can learn in the c > 1 compressed setting, the temporal range of the model can be
significantly increased.
B Compression Acros s Layers
We inspect the compression loss broken down by the layer index, to investigate whether there is
a trend in network depth with how compressible the representations are. The compression loss
here refers to the attention-reconstruction attention loss. We plot this for a 24 layer trained model
on Enwik8, and an 18 layer model trained on WikiText-103. The compression loss for character-
based language modelling is about one order of magnitude lower than that of word-level language
modelling. The first layer’s representations are highly compressible, however from then on there is
no fixed trend. Some non-contiguous layers have a very similar compression loss (e.g. 4 & 6, 5 &
7) which suggests information is being routed from these layer pairs via the skip connection.
Layer
Figure 6: Model analysis. Compression loss broken down by layer.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Layer
C Comparison of Compressed Memory Sizes
We compare the best test perplexity obtained for the Compressive Transformer trained on WikiText-
103 and Enwik8 across a range of compressed memory sizes. For both models, the best model used
a 1D convolution compression network with a compression rate of3. The Enwik8 model was trained
with an embedding size of 1024, 8 attention heads, 24 layers, an mlp hidden size of 3072, a sequence
window size of 768, and a memory size of 768. We see the best compressed memory size is 3, 072
in this sweep, facilitating a total attention window of 3840. The WikiText-103 model was trained
with an embedding size of 1024, adaptive inputs using the same parameters as (Sukhbaatar et al.,
2019), 16 attention heads, 18 layers, an mlp hidden size of 4096, a sequence window of size 512
and a memory of size 512. The best compressed memory size is 1536 resulting in a total attention
window of c. 2048.
ComPressed Memory Size 512	1024 2048	3072 4096
Enwik8 BPC
1.01	0.99	0.98	0.97	1.00
Table 8: Compressed memory size vs test performance for Enwik8
14
Compressed Memory Size	256	512	1024	1536	2048
WikiText-103 Perplexity	18.2	17.9	17.6	17.1	17.7
Table 9: Compressed memory size vs test performance for WikiText-103
D PG-19 Preprocessing
The raw texts from the Gutenberg project were minimally pre-processed by removing boilerplate
license text. We then also replaced discriminatory words with a unique hDWxi token using the
Ofcom list of discriminatory words 4.
E PG-19 TOPICS
We present top-words for some of the topics on the PG-19 corpus. These were generated with LDA
topic model (Blei et al., 2003).
Table 10: Examples of top topics on PG-19 corpus.
Geography	War	Civilisations	Human Condition	Naval	Education	Art
water	people	roman	love	island	work	poet
river	emperor	rome	religion	ship	school	music
feet	war	greek	religious	sea	life	one
miles	army	city	life	men	children	poetry
north	death	gods	moral	captain	may	work
south	battle	king	human	coast	social	literature
mountains	city	first	society	land	child	art
sea	soldiers	caesar	man	great	education	great
lake	power	great	virtue	found	conditions	poem
rock	thousand	romans	nature	islands	well	written
mountain	arms	athens	marriage	shore	study	english
country	empire	greece	women	voyage	best	author
valley	upon	temple	christian	vessels	years	play
ice	country	son	age	time	possible	genius
west	time	egypt	law	english	class	style
F PG-19 Samples
We show a few different samples from the Compressive Transformer trained on PG-19. We use
Nucleus Sampling with p = 0.98 (Holtzman et al., 2019). We choose extracts of books from the
test set as prefixes. We see the model is able to continue in the style of the text, creating artificial
dialogue or descriptive text, and remembering the names of characters over hundreds of words.
As the Compressive Transformer is trained without state resetting, itis actually slightly out of sample
when provided with the (relatively) short contexts. This is because its memory and compressed
memory may be still empty (whereas they are always full during training). However we see a trend
of the samples usually improving towards the end.
4https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0023/91625/
OfcomQRG-AOC.pdf
15
Context from Baby Mine by Maragaret Mayo:
CHAPTER I
Even in college Alfred Hardy was a young man of fixed ideas and high ideals and proud of it.
His friend, Jimmy Jinks, had few ideas and no ideals, and was glad of it, and before half of their
first college term had passed, Jimmy had ridded himself of all such worries as making up his
own mind or directing his own morals. Alfred did all these things so much better, argued Jimmy,
furthermore, Alfred LIKED to do them-Jimmy owed it to his friend to give him that pleasure.
Compressive Transformer:
He did not like doing them in the most elegant of all possible marble walks-where freshmen
and sophomores stand and talk and laugh and chatter till evening falls and look cool and still
and cool and beautifully white in spite of the hot sun, but had to go there for a month before
going home. It happened one day that he and Jimmy were strolling together in the green shade
of St. Martin’s, and Jimmy naturally asked why he was so silent. He was very talkative as
most boys are who have once got the habit of it on shore, so the need for answering was soon
supplied.
”I am wondering,” he said, ”why my old friend and chum, Jimmy Jinks, is living a single life
and so has no boys. Have you not noticed that many of his old friends had their own boys to
follow in their footsteps and help, and often helped successfully too?”
”Oh, yes,” said Alfred, ”it was plain enough then that he liked to live by himself and got none
of his present pleasures or entertainments because of the other fellow’s giving it to him.”
”Then it IS sad,” said Jimmy, ”that an old friend like the friend of Big Lights, Jimmy Reynolds,
should be living the single life and having no boys.”
”And it is pretty true, too,” said Alfred, ”yet I believe it is the best thing that could happen even
now.”
”And so do I,” said Jimmy, ”and I also believe that it is time someone did something to make
the things worse for the other’s partner.”
”And so do I,” said Alfred, ”and so do I, and so do I.”
”What can we do?” asked Jimmy.
”I don’t know,” said Alfred, ”but if someone will come down to the valley and go through a
regular mill with the old forces at work, doing the work of the two, and doing it better than any
other Miller he ever saw or ever hoped to see, I think there will be a good deal of change in the
things and things to be cared for for and for driven and counter-driven.”
”I will come and do that mill,” said Jimmy.
16
Context from The Diary of Samuel Pepys:
June 1st. Having taken our leaves of Sir W. Batten and my Lady, who are gone this morn-
ing to keep their Whitsuntide, Sir W. Pen and I and Mr. Gauden by water to Woolwich, and
there went from ship to ship to give order for and take notice of their forwardness to go forth,
and then to Deptford and did the like, having dined at Woolwich with Captain Poole at the
tavern there. From Deptford we walked to Redriffe, calling at the half-way house, and there
come into a room where there was infinite of new cakes placed that are made against Whit-
suntide, and there we were very merry. By water home, and there did businesses of the office.
Among others got my Lord’s imprest of L1000 and Mr. Creed’s of L10,000 against this voyage
their bills signed. Having wrote letters into the country and read some things I went to bed.
Compressive Transformer:
So I rose and did some business at the office, and then to dinner, where great abundance of
good things of the kitchen I only being partaker in the feast. After dinner I went to look at the
yard and found it in a very bad condition, so I went home and there finding no delight in seeing
things I should make shift to get in my way and so I will leave off.
So I took leave of my great friend, and the next day being Sunday, my wife and I and a
great number of friends went by water to Deptford, and there took the oaths of allegiance and
supremacy and promised such obedience to the Lord as should hereafter turn to the advantage
of our State. Being come back we found the shops and warehouses in a pitiable condition, so
my wife and I and all the rest of the friends went home and there did the like and by Saturday
day I being alone in my office I found myself in a very bad situation, for my Lord, and Mr.
Creed, and Pett were all standing ready to receive and receive the oaths of allegiance and right
to make use of the ten days’ licence I had allowed for this purpose by virtue of the law that was
such a help to the servant. Having looked at the ships, I told my wife what I had seen and that
I was greatly troubled at my situation and, I hope that will mend it.
So that is the end of a long and patient seeking after those things which in my opinion I deserve
and may get if I can only by fair means get them.
17
Context from The Patrol of the Sun Dance Trail by Ralph Connor:
High up on the hillside in the midst of a rugged group of jack pines the Union Jack shook
out its folds gallantly in the breeze that swept down the Kicking Horse Pass. That gallant flag
marked the headquarters of Superintendent Strong, of the North West Mounted Police, whose
special duty it was to preserve law and order along the construction line of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company, now pushed west some scores of miles.
Along the tote-road, which ran parallel to the steel, a man, dark of skin, slight but wiry,
came running, his hard panting, his streaming face, his open mouth proclaiming his ex-
haustion. At a little trail that led to the left he paused, noted its course toward the flaunt-
ing flag, turned into it, then struggled up the rocky hillside till he came to the wooden
shack, with a deep porch running round it, and surrounded by a rustic fence which en-
closed a garden whose neatness illustrated a characteristic of the British soldier. The run-
ner passed in through the gate and up the little gravel walk and began to ascend the steps.
Compressive Transformer:
As though by mutual consent, all the three members of the Superintendent Force were standing
on the veranda watching his progress, a man came strolling slowly down the path, stopping
often to gaze curiously about him, then stopping once more when he saw the four standing on
the veranda. His face was dark, his eyes prominent, and the lines that furrowed his forehead
showed marks of many woes, yet his step was alert and he began to mount the steps with steady
strides.
The man’s attention was diverted by the unexpected appearance of the two policemen; a third
man came slipping up, grumbling under his breath, and stopped long enough to look doubtfully
around him, then slipped away again. In the meantime, the four on the veranda continued to
watch the approach of the new arrival. In spite of himself, the Superintendent Force became
conscious of a curious feeling-uneasiness that was almost fear-in the presence of that strange
man. He would not allow himself to admit the fact, yet he felt it in his bones. But to the
watchers, the plain, everyday features of that stranger and his coming, seemed only just what
the Seven White Shee owed him-their weight, their hurry, their blast.
Had a chariot been made for the good of the three horses, and had the driver been given orders
that he should speed them that he might win, they would have been heartening things in the
sight of the veteran and the victor. To you they would have been unintelligible to the root of
your understanding. When you gaze up in the faces of those four gray horses, you can see
clearly through the clouds of dust that rise from their hoofs, and discern plainly where the
banker is and where the hobo. Then you will understand why you shall not press the bitter
grapes and why you shall not spurn the generous doctrines. You will understand why you shall
not praise the lash or the spur, for you will know where the true would be and where the false
would be. Then you will understand why you, a man with reason and heart, need not tear your
hair over-bitter and why you need not laugh over the blunders of an ignorant man.
About nine o’clock that morning, two buggies, drawn by powerful horses, crossed the Rubicon
and turned the railroad from Sandhurst into the Hollow of the Mountains. And though the char-
ioteers stood at their horses’ heads, and their drivers cried at their loudest, there was not a man
in the four teams who did not feel that his day was worth all the toil and all the peril that he
had undergone. And if there were a man in them who did not know that-who did not feel that
the road through the Hollow of the Mountains is made easy by the arrival of travelers and by
the coming of government, there was one who did not at that moment care whether his day’s
work were worth all the toil and all the danger that he had had to endure or whether it were not
worth more than all.
18
Author Contributions
Model and Experiment design: JR, TL, AP, SJ
Dataset creation: AP, JR, CH
Text experiments: JR, AP
RL experiments: SJ
Speech experiments: JR
19