Figure 1: Illustrative 2D and 3D examples showing the results of our SpectralNet clustering (top)compared to typical results obtained with DCN, VaDE, DEPICT and IMSAT (bottom) on simulateddatasets in 2D and 3D. Our approach successfully finds these non-convex clusters, whereas thecompeting algorithms fail on all five examples. (The full set of results for these algorithms is shownin Figure 4 in Appendix A.)(Von Luxburg, 2007), arguably due to its ability to handle non-convex clusters. Finally, it has a solidprobabilistic interpretation, since the Euclidean distance in the embedding space is equal to a dif-fusion distance, which, informally, measures the time it takes probability mass to transfer betweenpoints, via all the other points in the dataset (Nadler et al., 2006; Coifman & Lafon, 2006a).
Figure 2: Grassmann distance as a function of iteration update for the MNIST dataset.
Figure 3: SpectralNet performance on the nested ‘C’ example. Top row: clustering using Spec-tralNet (left), spectral clustering (center), and k-means (right). Bottom row, left panel: SpectralNetoutputs (plotted in blue and green) vs. the true eigenvectors. Bottom row, right panel: loss andGrassmann distance as a function of iteration number; the values on the horizontal axis ×100 arethe numbers of the parameter updates.
Figure 4: from top to bottom: Results of DCN, VaDE, DEPICT and IMSAT on our illustrativedatasets.
Figure 5: From top: Typical results of DCN, VaDE, DEPICT and IMSAT on the nested ’C’s, withseveral different distances between the two clusters.
Figure 6: The nested ’C’s, colored by DEPICT target distribution. Left: at initialization (withagglomerative clustering initialization). the DEPICT loss at this stage is 9.01. Right: after DEPICTtraining. The loss is 0.22. Although the loss decreases with training, the target distribution becomescorrupted.
Figure 7: Illustration of the construction of Lemma C.2. We select the set X to lie in a grid in theZ = 0 plane. Given an arbitrary dichotomy X = S ∪ T (points are marked with filled circles,colored respectively in red and blue), we first add points to make the sets balanced (not shown).
