Figure 1: Setup of a retinal prosthetic system. A. Cartoon showing ON (purple) and OFF(green)RGCs overlayed on top of an electrode array (black dots). The cells firing due to passing currentthrough the orange electrode are lightly shaded. Note that a cell can fire even if an axon of the cellpasses near the stimulating electrode. Hence, single electrode stimulation leads to firing of manycells. B. Real recorded spiking activity in a two populations of primate retinal ganglion cells (RGCs)demonstrating the lack of specificity from electrical stimulation. The electrodes are in blue and thestimulated electrode is shaded green. C. The target firing pattern r often lies outside the set of firingpatterns achievable with the prosthesis. The goal of the learned metric is to define a distance measureto identify the nearest feasible electrical stimulation r. R denotes the set of all neural populationresponses.
Figure 2: Method for constructing an objective for learning a neural metric using triplet-based losses.
Figure 3: Quantitative analysis of learned metric. (A) ROC curve measuring false positive rate versustrue positive rate across a range of thresholds for the convolutional neural network learned metric(blue, Area Under Curve (AUC:0.9), quadratic learned metric (green, AUC:0.77), and Hammingdistance (red, AUC:0.56). Note that curves closer to the upper left corner correspond to higher qualitymetrics. (B) Precision and recall of classification as spike pattern from same stimulus or a differentstimulus across increasing number of retrieved nearest neighbors from a collection of responsesconsisting of all 99 repeats of 10 different stimuli. The best achievable performance is shown withdashed lines. Models and colors same as (A). (C) t-SNE embedding of the collection of responses in(B) using distances estimated by the convolutional neural network. Each dot is a population responseand responses with same color were generated by the same visual stimulus.
Figure 4: Decoded stimulus degrades with increasing response distance. (A) Target and retrievedresponses at different distances according to a learned quadratic metric. Receptive field locations ofOFF and ON parasol cells are shown (shading indicates firing). Numbers above indicate percentileof cumulative distribution across distances in learned metric space. Linearly decoded stimulus andthe difference from the decoded stimulus for the target firing pattern is shown below, respectively.
Figure 5: Learned quadratic response metric gives better stimulus reconstruction than using aHamming metric. (A) First column: target firing pattern in ON and OFF parasol cells (shadingindicates firing) and decoded stimulus. Middle column: nearest feasible, elicited firing pattern asjudged by learned metric and associated decoded stimulus. The scaled mean squared error fromtarget response is shown in the decoded figure. Right column: nearest feasible, elicited firing patternas judged by Hamming metric and associated decoded stimulus. (B) Same as (A) but for a secondtarget firing pattern. (C) MSE of decoded stimulus for nearest firing pattern for learned metric versusHamming metric for all observed firing patterns. Note that 33%, 49%, 18% of patterns reside above,on and below the line of equality, (D) Rank order of stimulation patterns selected by the learnedmetric (red) and Hamming metric (blue) versus MSE of decoded stimulus for the first 2000 closestpatternsdiscrete and therefore provide a less granular representation of the decoding errors associated withthe stimuli.
Figure 6: Convolutional network used for response embedding. The convolutional filtering is specifiedbetween each layer. For example 3 × 3, 1 means convolution of a 3 × 3 filter with stride 1.
Figure 7: Accuracy of linear decoder. (A) The linearly decoded stimulus (right) and the average ofstimuli (left) corresponding to 6 different most frequently occurring response patterns. The number ofspikes is indicated above each non-parametric decoder (left column). The relative mean-squared error(MSE) between two decoding approaches is also indicated. (B) The relative MSE between two linearand non-parametric decoding (y-axis) v/s number of averaged spikes (x-axis) for different responsepatterns (blue dots). The relative MSE between non-parametric decoding using two independent setof response samples is also shown (green).
