Figure 1: Deep information bottleneck with the copula augmentation. Green circles describe randomvariables and orange rectangles denote deep nets parametrising the random variables. The blue circlestands for latent random variables whereas the red circle denotes the copula transformed randomvariables.
Figure 2: Information curves for the artificial experiment. The red curve describes the informationcurve with copula transformation whereas the orange one illustrates the plain information curve. Thenumbers represent the dimensions in the latent space t which are needed to reconstruct the output y .
Figure 4: Information curves for training with outlier data (a) and a sample convergence plot of DIBand cDIB models for λ = 100 (b). The y axis of the right figure shows the value of the loss function.
Figure 3: Reconstruction ofy without (a) and with the copula transformation (b). Blue circles depictthe output space and the red triangles ——the conditionals means μ(y). The better the red trianglesfill up the blue area, the better the reconstruction.
Figure 5: Information curves for the real data experiment. The red curve is the information curvewith copula transformation whereas the orange one depicts the plain information curve. The num-bers represent the dimensions in the latent space t which are needed to reconstruct the output y .
Figure 6: Latent space t consisting of two dimensions along with marginal densities without (a) andwith (b) the copula transformation. The copula transformation leads to a disentangled latent space,which is reflected in non-overlapping modes of marginal distributions.
Figure 7: Latent space t consisting of two dimensions along with marginal densities without (left)and with (right) the copula transformation, for different values of λ ranging between 1.79 and 95.87.
Figure 8:	Continuation of Figure 7. Latent space t consisting of two dimensions along with marginaldensities without (left) and with (right) the copula transformation, for different values of λ rangingbetween 157.67 and 1897.15. The copula transformation leads to a disentangled latent space, whichis reflected in non-overlapping modes of marginal distributions.
Figure 9:	Different extensions of Experiment 1: (a) comparison of the copula transformation tonormalising the input data (to zero mean and unit variance), (b) Experiment 1 with a gamma insteadof a beta transformation. All curves are computed over the same range of the hyperparameter λ. Thecopula pre-transformation yields higher information curves and uses fewer dimensions in the latentspace.
