Figure 1: Identities and their Expression Trees. with (a) a symbolic expression, (b) a functionevaluation, and (c) a number represented as the decimal tree (also part of the function evaluation data)Table 1: Symbols in our grammar, i.e. the functions, variables, and constantsUnary functions, F1					Terminal, T		Binary, F2sin	cos	csc	sec	tan	0	1	+cot	arcsin	arccos	arccsc	arcsec	2	3	×arctan	arccot	sinh	cosh	csch	4	10	∧sech	tanh	coth	arsinh	arcosh	0.5	-1	arcsch	arsech	artanh	arcoth	exp	0.4	0.7						π	x	F1 → sin, cos, tan, . . .	(3)F2 → +, ∧, ×, . . .	(4)T → -1, 0, 1, 2, π, x, y, . . . , any number of precision 2 in [-3.14,+3.14]	(5)Table 1 presents the complete list of functions and symbols as well as examples of the terminalsof the grammar. Note that we exclude subtraction and division because they can be representedwith addition, multiplication and power, respectively. Furthermore, the equations can have as manyvariables as needed.
Figure 2: Tree-structured recursive neural model, for the trees in Figure 1a (left) and 1b (right)which is representable in our grammar. In order to make this clear, consider number 2.5. In order torepresent this number, we expand it into its decimal representation 2.5 = 2 × 100 + 5 × 10-1 andfeed this as one of the function evaluation expressions for training (Figure 1c). Therefore, we canrepresent floating point numbers of finite precision using integers in the range [-1,10].
Figure 3: Evaluating Equation Completion, Figure 3a shows the top-k accuracy of the symbolicdata for different methods, and Figure 3b illustrates the minimum MSE of the top-k predictions, forthe function evaluation data.
Figure 4: Examples of Equation Completion of the Tree LSTM + data model. Figures 4a and 4bshow examples of equation completion from the test set where the predictions are ranked by model’sconfidence and the correct prediction is shown in boldface. Figure 4c depicts the predicted values ofcos(x) with blue dots for x in [-3.14,3.14] in the test setthat use function evaluation data. We can see from the figure, that Tree LSTM’s MSE is better thatthat of Tree NN across all ks.
