Figure 1: Eigenspectrum of D(X) at three instants during training (20%, 40% and 100% completion, darkeris later). The eigenspectrum in Fig. 1b for the fully-connected network has a much smaller rank and muchlarger variance than the one in Fig. 1a which also performs better on MNIST. This indicates that convolutionalnetworks are better conditioned than fully-connected networks in terms of D(x).
Figure 2: EigensPeCtrum of D(X) at three instants during training (20%, 40% and 100% completion, darker islater). The eigenvalues are much larger in magnitude here than those of MNIST in Fig. 1, this suggests a largergradient diversity for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The diffusion matrix for CIFAR-100 in Fig. 2b has largereigenvalues and is more non-isotropic and has a much larger rank than that of Fig. 2a; this suggests that gradientdiversity increases with the number of classes. As Fig. 2a and Fig. 2c show, augmenting input data increasesboth the mean and the variance of the eigenvalues while keeping the rank almost constant.
Figure 3: Fig. 3a shows the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of xik+1 - xki where k is the number of epochs and idenotes the index of the weight. Fig. 3b shows the auto-correlation of xik with 99% confidence bands denoted bythe dotted red lines. Both Figs. 3a and 3b show the mean and one standard-deviation over the weight index i; thestandard deviation is very small which indicates that all the weights have a very similar frequency spectrum.
Figure 4: Gradient field for the dynamics in Example 19: line-width is proportional to the magnitude ofthe gradient ∣∣Vf (X)k, red dots denote the most likely locations of the steady-state e-φ while the potentialΦ is plotted as a contour map. The critical points of f(x) and Φ(x) are the same in Fig. 4a, namely (±1, 0),because the force j(x) = 0. For λ = 0.5 in Fig. 4b, locations where Vf(x) = 0 have shifted slightly as predictedby Theorem 22. The force field also has a distinctive rotation component, see Remark 21. In Fig. 4c with alarge ∣ j(x)∣, SGD converges to limit cycles around the saddle point at the origin. This is highly surprising anddemonstrates that the solutions obtained by SGD may be very different from local minima.
