Figure 1: Left: Random samples from the generator trained asa boundary-seeking GAN (BGAN) with discrete MNIST data.
Figure 2: Left: Ground-truth 16-color (4-bit) quantizedCelebA images downsampledto 32 × 32. Right: Sam-ples produced from the gen-erator trained as a boundary-seeking GAN on the quantizedCelebA for 50 epochs.
Figure 3: Highly realistic samples from a genera-tor trained with BGAN on the CelebA and LSUNdatasets. These models were trained using a deepResNet architecture with gradient norm regular-ization (Roth et al., 2017). The Imagenet modelwas trained on the full 1000 label dataset withoutconditioning.
Figure 4: Training a GAN with different generator loss functions and 5 updates for the generator forevery update of the discriminator. Over-optimizing the generator can lead to instability and poorerresults depending on the generator objective function. Samples for GAN and GAN with the proxyloss are quite poor at 50 discriminator epochs (250 generator epochs), while BGAN is noticeablybetter. At 100 epochs, these models have improved, though are still considerably behind BGAN.
Figure 5: Following the generator objective using gradient descent on the pixels. BGAN and theproxy have sharp initial gradients that decay to zero quickly, while the variational lower-bound ob-jective gradient slowly increases. The variational lower-bound objective leads to very poor images,while the proxy and BGAN objectives are noticeably better. Overall, BGAN performs the best inthis task, indicating that its objective will not overly disrupt adversarial learning.
Figure 6: Comparison of the variance-reducing method from Equation 10 and estimating β usingMonte-Carlo in Equation 8. α indicates the variance-reducing method, and β is estimating β usingMonte-Carlo. z = indicates the number of samples from the prior, h(z), and x = indicates thenumber of samples from the conditional, gθ (x | z) used in estimation. Plotted are the estimatedGAN distances (2 * JSD - log 4) from the discriminator. The minimum GAN distance, - log4,is included for reference. Using the variance-reducing method gives a generator with consistentlylower estimated distances than estimating β directly.
