Table 1: Characteristics of Thompson Sampling, ε-greedy, and Boltzmann exploration what informa-tion they use for explorationStrategy	∣ Greedy-Action ∣ Estimated Q-values ∣ Estimated uncertaintiesε-greedy	∣	✓	∣	X	∣	XBoltzmann exploration ∣	✓	∣	✓	∣	XThompson Sampling ∣	✓	∣	✓	∣	✓However, Boltzmann exploration is sub-optimal in settings where there is high variances. For exampleif the current Q estimate is according to Figure 1(b), then Boltzmann exploration assigns almostequal probability to actions 5 and 6, even though action 6 has much higher uncertainty and needs tobe explored more. Thus, both ε-greedy and Boltzmann exploration strategies are sub-optimal sincethey do not maintain an uncertainty estimate over the Q function estimation. In contrast, Thompsonsampling uses both estimated Q function and its uncertainty estimates to carry out the most efficientexploration.
Table 2: Comparison of scores and sample complexities (scores in the first two columns are averageof 100 consecutive episodes). The scores of DDQN+ are the reported scores of DDQN in Van Hasseltet al. (2016) after running it for 200M interactions at evaluation time where the ε = 0.001. BootstrapDQN (Osband et al., 2016), CTS, Pixel, Reactor (Ostrovski et al., 2017) are borrowed from theoriginal papers. For NoisyNet (Fortunato et al., 2017), the scores of NoisyDQN are reported. Samplecomplexity, SC: the number of samples the BDQN requires to beat the human score (Mnih et al.,2015)(“ - ” means BDQN could not beat human score). SC+: the number of interactions the BDQNrequires to beat the score of DDQN+.
Table 3: 1st column: score ratio of BDQN to DDQN run for same number of time steps. 2nd column:score ratio of BDQN to DDQN+. 3rd column: score ratio of BDQN to human scores reported atMnih et al. (2015). 4th column: Area under the performance plot ration (AuPPr) of BDQN to DDQN.
Table 4: The comparison of BDQN, DDQN, Dropout-DDQN and random policy. Dropout-DDQNas another randomization strategy provides a deficient estimation of uncertainty and results in poorexploration/exploitation trade-off.
