Table 1: Summary of openly available benchmark datasets in decaNLP and evaluation metrics thatcontribute to the decaScore. All metrics are case insensitive. nF1 is a normalized F1 metric thatstrips out articles and punctuation. EM is an exact match comparison: for text classification, thisamounts to accuracy; for WOZ it is equivalent to turn-based dialogue state exact match (dsEM) andfor WikiSQL it is equivalent to exact match of logical forms (lfEM). F1 for QA-ZRE is a corpus levelmetric (cF1) that takes into account that some questions are unanswerable.
Table 2: Validation metrics for decaNLP baselines: sequence-to-sequence (S2S) with self-attentivetransformer layers (+SAtt), the addition of coattention (+CAtt) over a split context and question,and a question pointer (+QPtr). The last model is equivalent to MQAN. Multitask models use around-robin batch-level sampling strategy to jointly train on the full decaNLP. The last columnincludes an additional anti-curriculum (+ACurr) phase that trains on SQuAD alone before switchingto the fully joint strategy. Entries marked with ’-’ would correspond to decaScores for aggregatesof separately trained models; this is not well-defined without a mechanism for choosing betweenmodels.
Table 3: Validation metrics for MQAN using various training strategies. The first is fully joint,which samples batches round-robin from all tasks. Others first use a curriculum or anti-curriculumschedule over a subset of tasks before switching to fully joint over all tasks. Curriculum first trainstasks that take relatively few iterations to converge when trained alone. This omits SQuAD, IWSLT,CNN/DM, and MNLI. The remaining strategies are anti-curriculum. They include in the first phaseeither SQuAD alone, SQuAD, IWSLT, and CNN/DM, or SQuAD, IWSLT, CNN/DM, and MNLI.
Table 4: Expanded Results for MQAN models with the addition of contextualized word vectors (CoVe, McCann et al. (2017)), The left-most column is the data usedto train the MQAN model. When trained on decaNLP, the Fully Joint strategy was used.
Table 5: Expanded Results for MQAN models. The left-most column is the data used to train the MQAN model. When trained on decaNLP, the SQuAD-Iirstanti-curriculum strategy was used.
