Table 1: Evaluation result on KITTI 2015 stereo dataset(Geiger et al. (2012)). K means the modelis only trained on KITTI dataset, while CS + K means the model is trained on Cityscapes dataset andthen finetune on KITTI dataset. Also, pp means post processing step, and more details about postprocessing can be found in 6.3. For a fair comparison, we train the network proposed by Godardet al and our non-shared network both to 50 and 100 epoch, and find that our network has largerimprovement and better performance than Godard et al. (2017) when trained longer to 100 epoch.
Table 2: Result on Eigen split Eigen et al. (2014). K is KITTI and CS is cityscapes dataset fortraining. We use the evaluation result provided in Godard et al. (2017). For a fair comparison,we use the crop the same as Garg et al. (2016) except for Eigen et al. (2014) and apply the samehyper-parameters as Godard et al on our model. Besides, we set the maximun evaluation depth to50 meters(cap 50m) in the second row which is the same as Garg et al. (2016) , while others remain80 meters. Also, we compared uncropped result with Godard et al, on which the superiority becomemore obvious.
Table 3: Evaluation result on virtual-KITTI. Once our ground truth become dense, our model outperformance other models for its sharp and clear boundaries on predicted depth map. Even wecrop the black edges of Godard et al (the left 10% of the whole disparity map) in the second row,our model is still superior to Godard et al. (2017) (the state of art unsupervised monocular depthestimation using left and right information only). We evaluate on 3 different methods: naive, cropthe black edge, both crop the edge and set the maximun evaluation depth to 50 meters5	ConclusionIn this work, we present an occlusion mask and filp-over training scheme to enable effective learningof object boundaries when using image warping. With our new network, our model achieves state ofart result using only stereo images. Moreover, as warping based image reconstruction is commonlyused in depth estimation problem, our method provides a solution to the fundamental difficulty ofoccluded areas introduced by image warping.
