Table 1: Error rates for expression classification using representation learned by FNNDExpression Classification	Original Data		D = 1		D = 3		D = 5		Male	Female	Male	Female	Male	Female	Male	FemaleFalse Positive Rate	0.04	0.14	0.04	0.16	0.06	0.12	0.08	0.16False Negative Rate	0.16	0.02	0.2	0.08	0.2	0.14	0.18	0.16Table 2: Error rates for expression classification using representation learned by TCNND4.2 Illustration of ResultsThe GENKI Dataset. Figure 3a illustrates the gender classification accuracy of the adversary fordifferent values of distortion. It can be seen that the adversary’s accuracy of classifying the sensi-tive variable (gender) decreases progressively as the distortion increases. Given the same distortionvalue, FNND achieves lower gender classification accuracy compared to TCNND. An intuitive ex-planation is that the FNND uses both the noise vector and the original image to generate the pro-cessed image. However, the TCNND generates the noise mask that is independent of the originalimage pixels and adds the noise mask to the original image in the final step. To demonstrate theeffectiveness of the learned GAPF schemes, we compare the gender classification accuracy of thelearned GAPF schemes with adding uniform or Laplace noise. Figure 3a shows that for the samedistortion, the learned GAPF schemes achieve much lower gender classification accuracies than us-ing uniform or Laplace noise. Furthermore, the estimated mutual information I (X; S) normalized1 R (、厂 C、 1	1	1Λ 1 ∙ J J ∙	/L・	Ct ∖by I (X; S) also decreases as the distortion increases (Figure 3b).
Table 2: Error rates for expression classification using representation learned by TCNND4.2 Illustration of ResultsThe GENKI Dataset. Figure 3a illustrates the gender classification accuracy of the adversary fordifferent values of distortion. It can be seen that the adversary’s accuracy of classifying the sensi-tive variable (gender) decreases progressively as the distortion increases. Given the same distortionvalue, FNND achieves lower gender classification accuracy compared to TCNND. An intuitive ex-planation is that the FNND uses both the noise vector and the original image to generate the pro-cessed image. However, the TCNND generates the noise mask that is independent of the originalimage pixels and adds the noise mask to the original image in the final step. To demonstrate theeffectiveness of the learned GAPF schemes, we compare the gender classification accuracy of thelearned GAPF schemes with adding uniform or Laplace noise. Figure 3a shows that for the samedistortion, the learned GAPF schemes achieve much lower gender classification accuracies than us-ing uniform or Laplace noise. Furthermore, the estimated mutual information I (X; S) normalized1 R (、厂 C、 1	1	1Λ 1 ∙ J J ∙	/L・	Ct ∖by I (X; S) also decreases as the distortion increases (Figure 3b).
