Table 1: Frechet distance on different classes of MNIST dataset.
Table 2: Results on the explained variance of principle component analysis (PCA) on features en-coded by different represenations. ‘Exp’ denotes ‘explained variance’, ‘Ac-Exp’ denotes ‘accumu-lated explained variance’. Although the architecture of ImageNet inception model is much morecomplex than the domain-specific autoencoder and VAE, the features encoded by ImageNet modelare limited in a relatively low-dimensional subspace.
Table 3: FID results on different representations. Only domain-specific encoders including AE andVAE used in our proposed method provides consistent results with human judgements.
Table 4: The fraction of pairs on which each met-ric agrees with human judgements on MNIST.
Table 5: Human judgements on Figure 1.
Table 6: Human judgements on Figure 2.
Table 7: Results of FID, CAFD and KLD on MNIST. Lower scores infer better image quality. The‘test’ denotes the MNIST test set, ‘adjusted’ denotes the features after axis permutation. ‘generated’denotes samples generated by a specific GAN model. ‘hack’ denotes the image sets after FGSM(Goodfellow et al., 2014a). We use two setting of different representations in this experiment: adomain-specific classifier and a VAE. For VAE, ‘generated’ and ‘hack’ are the sampled images inFigure 2. Compared to FID, CAFD are more robust to feature-level adjustments.
Table 8: The classification results on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) images using in-ception model trained on ImageNet. The class labels ’Bird’ and ’Dog’ are divided into severalsubclasses.
Table 9: P-value results of AD-test (Scholz & Stephens, 1987) on features of each class and thewhole training images. The whole features were randomly divided into 10 sets. Compared to themixed features, features encoding images from a single class are more Gaussian.
Table 10: CAFD Results of different GAN models on MNIST and FASHION-MNIST (Xiao et al.,2017). We use VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2014) trained on specific datasets as the feature encoder.
