Table 1: A brief overview of the sentence representations we experiment with in this workOut (SOMO) tests whether a noun or a verb is out of context (replaced) in a sentence.
Table 2: Validating the transfer potential predicted by Condensed Feature Set (CFS) and Classifier(Clf.) Weight Difference. We evaluate our predicted ranked list against the gold utility transfer listusing NDCG @5, which is Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain, a measure of ranking qualitybiased towards top ranks. RR @ 1 or Reciprocal Rank, equals 1/R where R is the position in thepredicted list where the top item of gold list appears. The Clf. weight difference method is notapplicable for 2 sentence tasks (as discussed in ยง6)6Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 201901234567Numberof tasks explored01234567Numberof tasks explored(a) SST (f) w/ CFS(c) TREC w/ CFSFigure 3: A graphical view depicting the transfer-learning (TL) gains for two tasks (SST(f) andTREC). These tasks are trained using pre-trained representations of other tasks, in the order of pre-dictions from our two methods (CFS and Clf. Weight Difference). Each figure shows the maximumTL gain (y-axis) by transfering from the best task explored until that point (x-axis). For comparison,a random baseline gives expected best-TL gain for a random ordering of tasks.
Table 1: Exact Transfer Results: Accuracies obtained on four tasks (TREC, MRPC, SICK, SST(f))by pre-training on all the other tasks. The top row (w/o transfer) denotes results without any transferlearning, and below we enlist the results with transfer learning.
Table 2: Top 3 predictions of tasks using CFS in the order of transfer potential2Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20193 Transfer Evaluation(a) SICK w/ CFS01234567Number of tasks exploredFigure 1: A graphical view depicting the transfer-learning (TL) gains for two tasks (SICK andMRPC). These tasks are trained using pre-trained representations of other tasks, in the order ofpredictions from CFS information transfer. Each figure shows the maximum TL gain (y-axis) bytransfering from the best task explored until that point (x-axis). For comparison, a random baselinegives expected best-TL gain for a random ordering of tasks.
