Table 1: Euler equations: test average MSE for two baselines (ResNet and ConvLSTM) and 4instances of the proposed model for different forecasting horizons. PT and JT are respectivelythe pre-trained and jointly trained models, SSE and MSRE the two multi-step training strategiesintroduced in section 3.2.
Table 2: Navier-Stokes equations with R = 5000 : Test average MSE per time-step for a JointlyTrained system, a system with pre-trained estimator and one with a pre-trained estimator fine-tunedon the Navier-Stokes data, for different forecasting horizons.
Table 3: Navier Stokes equations with R = 100000 : Test average MSE per time-step for a JointlyTrained system and one with a pre-trained estimator fine-tuned on the Navier-Stokes data, for dif-ferent forecasting horizons.
Table 4: Navier Stokes equations with R = 5000 keeping only half the initial dataset for training :Test average MSE per time-step for a Jointly Trained system, a system with an estimator pre-trainedon Euler dynamics fine-tuned on the Navier-Stokes data and a ResNet, for different forecastinghorizons.
Table 5: Navier Stokes equations with R = 100000 keeping only half the initial dataset for train-ing : Test average MSE per time-step for a Jointly Trained system, a system with an estimatorpre-trained on Euler dynamics fine-tuned on the Navier-Stokes data and a ResNet, for differentforecasting horizons.
Table 6: Navier Stokes equations with R = 5000 keeping only one fourth of the initial dataset fortraining : Test average MSE per time-step for a Jointly Trained system, a system with an estimatorpre-trained on Euler dynamics fine-tuned on the Navier-Stokes data and a ResNet, for differentforecasting horizons.
Table 7: Forecasting with Jointly Trained model JT MSRE on Euler simulations: Test average MSEper time-step for different training sequence lengths l, for different forecasting horizons. Testinghorizon l = 8.
Table 8: Forecasting with pre-trained Estimator on Euler simulations: Test average MSE per time-step for different training sequence lengths l, for different forecasting horizons. Testing horizonl = 8.
Table 9: Forecasting with Jointly Trained system : Test average MSE per time-step with ScheduledSampling, Systematic Teacher Forcing and No Teacher Forcing, for different forecasting horizons.
Table 10: Forecasting with pre-trained estimator : Test average MSE per time-step with ScheduledSampling, Systematic Teacher Forcing and No Teacher Forcing, for different forecasting horizons.
