Table 1: White-box zero-knowledge CW-'2attack results. Here, accuracy (adv) measuresclassifying the adversarial inputs to the origi-nal classes.
Table 2: Mean minimum '∞ perturbation (in red, computed on e ∈ {0.1,0.2,0.3,0.4,0.5}) andvictim accuracy (in blue, for e ≤ 0.3) for '∞ attacks on MNIST. We manually assign the min. per-turbation e = 0.6 to inputs that all attacks failed to find adversarial perturbations.
Table 3: Accuracy and detection rates against black-box SPSA attack ( = 0.3), with a comparisonto white-box PGD on 1000 randomly sampled test datapoints. The higher the better.
Table C.1: Mean minimum '∞ perturbation (in red, computed on e ∈ {0.01,0.02,0.05,0.1,0.2})and victim accuracy (in blue, for e ≤ 0.1) for '∞ attacks on CIFAR Plane-Vs-frog binary classifi-cation. We manually assign the min. perturbation e = 0.3 to inputs that all attacks failed to findadversarial perturbations.
Table C.2: Accuracy and detection rates against black-box SPSA attack ( = 0.05) on CIFARplane-vs-frog, with a comparision to white-box PGD. The higher the better.
Table C.3: Clean test accuracy on MNIST classification (with varied bottleneck layer sizes).
Table D.1: Clean test accuracy on CIFAR plane-vs-frog classification.
Table D.2: Clean test accuracy on CIFAR-10 classification.
Table E.1: FGSM white-box zero-knowledge attack results on MNIST.
Table E.2: PGD white-box zero-knowledge attack results on MNIST.
Table E.3: MIM white-box zero-knowledge attack results on MNIST.
Table E.4: Perfect knowledge attacks on MNIST. This is done using the PGD attack with = 0.2. ‘ZK’ stands for zero knowledge, ‘PK0’ where you haveknowledge of the K samples but not of the detection system. ‘PKM’, ‘PKL’, and ‘PKK’ are attacks where you have knowledge of the K samples and of themarginal, logit and KL detection mechanisms respectively.
Table E.5: FGSM white-box zero-knowledge attack results on CIFAR plane-vs-frog binary classification.
Table E.6: PGD white-box zero-knowledge attack results on CIFAR plane-vs-frog binary classification.
Table E.7: MIM white-box zero-knowledge attack results on CIFAR plane-vs-frog binary classification.
Table E.8: CW white-box zero-knowledge attack results on CIFAR plane-vs-frog binary classification.
Table E.9: Perfect knowledge attacks on CIFAR binary task. This is done using the PGD attack with = 0.1. ‘ZK’ stands for zero knowledge, ‘PK0’ where youhave knowledge of the K samples but not of the detection system. ‘PKM’, ‘PKL’, and ‘PKK’ are attacks where you have knowledge of the K samples and of themarginal, logit and KL detection mechanisms respectively.
