Table 1: Talk The Walk grounds human generated dialogue in (real-life) perception and action.
Table 2: Accuracy results for tourist localization with emergent language, showing continuous(Cont.) and discrete (Disc.) communication, along with the prediction upper bound. T denotesthe length of the path and a ✓ in the “MASC” column indicates that the model is conditioned on thecommunicated actions.
Table 3: Localization accuracy of tourist communi- Table 4: Full task evaluation of localizationcating in natural language.	models using protocol of Appendix 11.
Table 5: Samples from the tourist models communicating in natural language. Contrary to thehuman generated utterance, the supervised model with greedy and beam search decoding producesan utterance containing the current state observation (bar). Also the reinforcement learning modelmentions the current observation but has lost linguistic structure. The fact that these localizationmodels are better grounded in observations than human utterances explains why they obtain higherlocalization accuracy.
Table 6: Full task performance of localizationmodels trained on human and random trajecto-ries. There are small benefits for training on ran-dom trajectories, but the most important hyper-parameter is to condition the tourist utteranceon a single observation (i.e. trajectories of sizeT = 0.) at evaluation time.
Table 7: Localization performance using pre-trained tourist (via imitation learning) withbeam search decoding of varying beam size.
Table 8: Localization given last {1, 3, 5} dialogue utterances (including the guide). We observethat (1) performance increases when more utterances are included; and (2) MASC outperforms no-MASC in all cases; and (3) mean T increases when more dialogue context is included.
Table 9: Accuracy of localization models on full task, using evaluation protocol defined in Algorithm1. We report the average over 3 runs.
Table 10: Results for landmark classification.
Table 11: Dataset statistics split by neighborhood and dia-logue status.
