Table 1:	Notes in the KernScores dataset, partitioned by composer. The “Early” collection consistsof Renaissance vocal music; a plurality of this collection is composed by Josquin.
Table 2:	Notes in the KernScores dataset, partitioned by ensemble type.
Table 3: Multi-part results. The “hierarchical” architecture is defined by equations (2) and (3),and the “distributed” architecture is defined by equation (4): see the polyphonic models discussionin Section 5. Part and global history refer to the number of time steps used to construct the partstates hp,t and global states ht respectively. Experiment 8 is a baseline in which the part models arecompletely decoupled (this is equivalent to single-part Experiment 22 in Table 5; on average, a fullscore in the KernScores dataset has 4.12 parts). Results are reported on non-piano test set data (seeAppendix A for discussion of piano data).
Table 4: Qualitative evaluation of the 10-frame hierarchical model: Experiment 4 in Table 3. Twentyparticipant were asked to judge 50 audio clips each of varying length. The scores indicate partici-pants’ average correct discriminations out of 10 (5.0 would indicate random guessing; 10.0 wouldindicate perfect discrimination).
Table 5: Single-part results. Loss is the cross-entropy described in Section 3.1. Losst and Lossn aredecompositions of the loss into component losses for duration yt and pitch yn predictions respec-tively. linn indicates a log-linear classifier (sigmoid for yn and softmax for yt). The inclusion oflocation features discussed in Section 5.1 is indicated by `. lin indicates the relative pitch log-linearclassifier described in Section 5.3 and 1n indicates the inclusion of pitch-class features. fc indicatesa fully connected layer. f and c indicates the pitch embeddings described in Section 5.4. convk indi-cates 1d convolution of width k . rnn indicates a recurrent layer. All hidden layers are parameterizedwith 300 nodes. Models were regularized with early stopping when necessary. The subscript k onthe history tensor xk indicates the number of frames of history used in each experiment (either 1, 5,or 10 frames). The history tensor Xk is modified to include continuation symbols '*' as it would inthe polyphonic prediction task; see the discussion at the top of section 5.
