Table 1: Examples of different types of errorError type	Non-systematic name	Systematic nameSpelling error	benzoil chloride 1,3-benzoxazoole	benzoyl chloride 1,3-benzoxazoleOrdering error	benzene, 1,4-dibromo-2-methyl 4-pyrimidinecarbaldehyde	1,4-dibromo-2-methylbenzene pyrimidine-4-carbaldehydeCommon name error	adenine Aspirin	9H-purin-6-amine 2-Acetoxybenzoic acidSynonym error	sodium butoxide 2-ethylfuroate	sodium;butan-1-olate ethyl furan-2-carboxylateMixed of synonym error and ordering error	2-hydroxy-8-iodonaphthalene 3-amino-1,2-benzisoxazole	8-iodonaphthalen-2-ol 1,2-benzoxazol-3-amineUniversity of Cambridge1. Unfortunately, nowadays a great number of the chemical substances areexpressed by their non-systematic names in chemical papers, which increases significantly the diffi-culties for this task, so our work focuses on the standardization of non-systematic names. Examplesof chemical information extraction are shown in Figure 1.
Table 2: Examples of applying BPE to chemical names (subwords are separated by @@)Original nameSplit name4-bromo-6-methoxyquinaldineethynyltris(propan-2-yl)silanemethyltrioctylazanium bromide4-bromo@@ -6-methoxy@@ quinaldineethynyl@@ tris(propan-2-yl)@@ silanemethyl@@ trioctyl@@ azanium bromide2.2	Tokenization by Byte Pair EncodingTo apply the sequence-to-sequence model, firstly we need to tokenize all the chemical names. Inthis paper, we use Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2015) to do the tokenization. Firstly,we initialize a symbol set by split all the names into characters. At this moment, the symbol setcontains only the single characters. Then we iteratively count all symbol pairs and replace eachoccurrence of the most frequent pair (X, Y) with a new symbol XY and add it to the symbol set.
Table 3: Results of different models on test datasetModels	Accuracy (%) BLEU (%)ChemHitS (Golebiewski et al.)	6.14	-Spelling error correction Spelling error correction + SMT Spelling error correction + sequence to sequence	2.89	- 26.25	53.90 54.04 69.74Table 4: Results for different numbers of BPE merge operation.
Table 4: Results for different numbers of BPE merge operation.
Table 5: Results of different Levenshtein distance thresholds for the spelling error correction. Foreach threshold, the first line is the accuracy after just doing the spelling error correction. The secondline is the accuracy after processing the non-systematic name by our whole framework. The numbersof BPE merge operation are all 5000.
Table 6: Examples of the non-systematic names which are successfully standardized. For eachexample, the first line is the name before standardization and the second line is the name afterstandardization.
Table 7: Distribution over error types of 100 failed attempts.
Table 8: Examples of failed attempts. For each example, the first line is the name before stan-dardization and the second line is the systematic name and the third line is the prediction of ourmodel.
