Table 1: Effects of an ensemble method. We use the CIFAR-10 dataset with various uniform noisefractions. All values are percentages and the best results are highlighted in bold if the gain is biggerthan 1%.
Table 2: Test accuracy (%) of different models trained on various datasets. We use the ensembleversion of DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if the gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 3: Test accuracy (%) of ResNet trained on various training methods which utilize a singleclassifier. We use the ensemble version of DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if thegain is bigger than 1%.
Table 4: Test accuracy (%) of 9-layer CNN trained on various training methods which utilize anensemble of classifiers or meta-learning model. We use the ensemble version of DDGC and bestresults are highlighted in bold if the gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 5: Test accuracy (%) of ResNet on black-box adversarial attacks. We use the ensemble versionof DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if the gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 6: Test accuracy (%) of ResNet optimized by adversarial training. We use the ensembleversion of DDGC, and best results are highlighted in bold if the gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 7: The L∞ mean perturbation and classification accuracy of ResNet-34 on clean and adver-sarial samples.
Table 8: The L∞ mean perturbation and classification accuracy (%) of DenseNet-100 on clean andadversarial samples.
Table 9: Comparison with softmax classifier fine-tuned with validation data. All values are percent-ages and the best results are highlighted in bold if gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 10: Test accuracy (%) of ResNet on white-box adversarial attacks. We use the ensembleversion of DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 11: Test accuracy (%) of ResNet optimized by adversarial training on CIFAR-10. We testthe white-box adversarial attacks. We use the ensemble version of DDGC, and best results arehighlighted in bold if the gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 12: Test accuracy (%) of DenseNet on white-box adversarial attacks. We use the ensembleversion of DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if gain is bigger than 1%.
Table 13: Test accuracy (%) of DenseNet on black-box adversarial attacks. We use the ensembleversion of DDGC, and the best results are highlighted in bold if gain is bigger than 1%.
