Table 1: Representation characteristics.
Table 2: Comparison of statistical characteristics for linear and ReLU layers. A 7-layer MLP wasused with MNIST dataset, and only the sixth layer was linear, and the others were ReLU layers.
Table 3: Statistical characteristics of representations transformed by CPNs. The original network is6-layer MLP on the MNIST dataset, and the 5th layer representations were transformed. To improvethe performance, the weights to the output layer were fine tuned after applying Q.
Table 4: Condition experiment results for CIFAR-10 CNN model. The best performing regularizerin each condition (each column) is shown in bold, and other regularizers whose performance rangeoverlaps with the best one are highlighted in green. For the default condition, the standard valuesof data size=50k and layer width=128 were used, and Adam optimizer was applied. For the othercolumns, all the conditions were the same as the default except for the condition indicated on the toppart of the columns. Regularizers were applied to the fully-connected layer.
Table 5: Penalty loss functions of representation regularizers.
Table 6: Statistical characteristics of learned representations.
Table 7: Architecture hyperparameters of CIFAR-10/100 CNN model.
Table 8: Condition experiment results for MNIST MLP model. The best performing regularizer ineach condition (each column) is shown in bold, and other regularizers whose performance rangeoverlaps with the best one are highlighted in green. For the default condition, the standard values ofdata size=50k and layer width=100 were used and Adam optimizer was applied. For other columns,all the conditions were the same as the default except for the condition indicated on the top part ofthe columns. Regularizers were applied to the fifth hidden layer.
Table 9: Condition experiment results for CIFAR-100 CNN model. The best performing regularizerin each condition (each column) is shown in bold, and other regularizers whose performance rangeoverlaps with the best one are highlighted in green. For the default condition, the standard valuesof data size=50k, layer width=128, and number of classes=100 were used. For other columns, allthe conditions were the same as the default except for the condition indicated on the top part of thecolumns. Regularizers were applied to the fully-connected layer.
