Table 1: Nomenclature used in Experiments section. Each abbreviation describes a tweak/ablationto our full model as presented in Section 4. Using this nomenclature, our full model as described inSection 4 and shown in Figure 1 would be a “AugAST-GSC” model.		Abbreviation		MeaningCode Representation	AST	Skips Step 2 in Section 4.
Table 2: Accuracy on the Fin-In-The-Blank task. Our model is the AugAST-GSC. The first numberin each cell is the accuracy of the model, where a correct prediction is one in which the graphnode that received the maximum attention weighting by the model contained the variable that wasoriginally in the <FILL-IN-THE-BLANK> spot. The second, parenthetical numbers are the top-5 accuracies, i.e. whether the correct node was among those that received the 5 largest attentionsweightings from the model. See Table 1 for explanations of the abbreviations. All models use GatedGraph Neural Networks as their GNN component.
Table 3: Accuracy (and top-5 accuracy) on the Fill-In-The-Blank task, depending on which typeof GNN the model uses. See Table 1 for explanations of the abbreviations. All models use AugASTas their code representation.
Table 4: Accuracy on the Variable Naming task. Our model is the AugAST-GSC. The first numberin each cell is the accuracy of the model, where we consider a correct output to be exact reproductionof the full name of the obfuscated variable (i.e. all the words in the name and then a EOS token).
Table 5: Accuracy (and top-5 accuracy) on the Variable Naming task, depending on which type ofGNN the model uses. See Table 1 for explanations of the abbreviations. All models use AugAST astheir code representation.
Table 6: Extra information about performance on the Variable Naming task. Entries in this table areof the form “subword accuracy, edit distance, edit distance divided by real name length”. The editdistance is the mean of the character-wise Levenshtein distance between the produced name and thereal name.
Table 7: Repositories used in experiments. All were taken from the Maven repository(https://mvnrepository.com/). Entries are in the form “group/repository name/version”.
Table 8: Edge types used in Augmented ASTs. The initial AST is constructed using the AST andnext_tOKEN edges, and then the remaining edges are added. In other words, the the “AST” modelfrom Table 1 uses a graph that contains only the AST and next_token edge types (and WORD-USEif it also uses a GSC), while the “AugAST” model contains all the edge types below. The reversedversion of every edge is also added as its own type (e.g. reverse_AST, reverse_LAST_READ)to let the GNN message passing occur in both directions.
