Table 1: Components of game motivationComponents	Sub-componentsAchievement	Advancement, Mechanics, CompetitionSocial	Socializing, Relationship, TeamworkImmersion	Discovery, Role Playing, Customization, Escapismthe scalarization in the reward space, we regard any policy that is not dominated by an alternativefeasible policy as an optimal policy, as shown in Fig. 1. We build our analysis upon the theorem thatthe policy is not dominated if and only if it is optimal under a linear scalarization to connect the setof optimal policy with the simplex of the coefficient vector. In this way, we characterize the range ofthe value function under optimal policies as a convex hull. We further estimate the range via valuelearning on the extreme points and define the suboptimality of a policy as the distance between itscorresponding value function and the range. As a result, we design an efficient algorithm with alinear program to minimize the distance and find the reward mechanism.
Table 2:	Accuracy and error of different approachesApproach	Accuracy (%)	ILE (%)Proposed approach (c = 0.5)	85.5	13.2Proposed approach (c = 0)	84.5	11.0Linear scalarization Ng et al. (2000)	48.6	21.0Max entropy scalarizationZiebart et al.	54.9	22.1(2008)		Large margin scalarizationParameswaran	59.2	19.6& Weinberger (2010)		Policy imitation	36.0	N/AProposed approach (Q() learned from	75.1	N/AMonte-Carlo sampling)5 Conclusions and Open ProblemsWe present MMBM, a general IRL model that takes multifaceted human motivations into consid-eration. The algorithm relies on relatively weak assumptions and does not require any explicitscalarization of the vector-valued reward function. Instead, it leverages the Pareto frontier of thevalue to characterize the set of optimal policies and to measure the optimality of the recorded be-havior. While the algorithm is not relying on the access of policy function nor the dynamics of theenvironment it can be applied to study complex, interactive environments with its historical dataset.
Table 3:	Different types of motivations in WoWAH and corresponding definitionsMotv. Category & Definitionr1 Advancement describes how fast the player levels up in the game. It’s thespeed the user levels up, divided by the averaged speed at the entire WoWAH.
