Table 1: Unsupervised classification accuracyMethods	20NeWsGroups	Yahoo! AnsWers	DBpediaLDA	2978	25.95	68.42NVDM	23.98	—	—TopicGAN	41.01	42.14	83.73Supervised pretraining of sequence generator As each sequential text has its corresponding bag-of-words, we can obtain numerous (bag-of-words, text) pairs to pretrain Gseq . To make Gseq robustto the noisy bag-of-words input, during pretraing, we add some noise such as randomly deletingwords to the input texts.
Table 2: Ablation study on unsupervised classification.
Table 3: Topic coherence scores. Higher is better.
Table 4: Perplexity of generated langauge on DBpedia and English Gigaword data. As there is nolabeled class in English Gigaword, we cannot train class LM in English Gigaword.
Table 5: (a) The accuracy of human correctly classified texts; (b) the ratio of human preference forthe generated texts.
Table 6: Topical words generated for discovered latent topics.		Dataset	Topic ID	Topical Words	1	midfielder, liverpool, munich, milan, defender, friendly, boss, debut, dallas, professional, Portuguese, PremiershiPtEnglish Gigaword	2	#,###.##, benchmark, composite, hang, profit-taking, ##,###.##, stories, clients, investor, shenzhen	3	killings, teenager, fbi, yemen, fatal, reportedly,jordanian, ring, transfer, cia, smuggling, atlanta	1	event, vocalist, songwriter, alpine, singing, pianist, bassist, pi- ano, host, guitarist, rb, paintingsDBpedia	2	streets, plaza, residence, mansion, cemetery, landmark, archi- tectural, brick, chapel, revival, citys, surviving	3	goalkeeper, midfielder, striker, defender, fc, defensive, foot- baller, matches, righthanded, loan, forward, soccer	1	crying, comfortable, glad, friendship, cheated, boyfriends, anyways, doi, shell, bother, jealous, talkedYahoo! Answers	2	crack, snow, boat, birds, sharing, aim, 98, fox, wood, Syn- drome, anti, monitor	3	registered, purchased, certificate, fairly, entry, suit, applying, costs, lease, funds, tons, telephone	1	solar, missions, spacecraft, shuttle, planetary, astronomy, orbit, satellites, materials, mars, flight, launch20NewsGroups	2	handguns, handgun, gun, violent, batf, firearms, criminals, firearm, sumgait, weapons, guns, mamma	3	car, tires, engine, bike, ford, cars, ride, rear, seat, honda, miles, shopIn the first part, the humans were demonstrated a set of example texts generated from the same latenttopic and they were asked to categorize the example texts into a specific topic like sports,economyor violence. Then, following the example texts, there were several multiple-choice questions whichhad a text from same topic as correct choice and some texts from other topics as incorrect choice ineach question. The humans were asked to choose the correct choice. As shown in Table 5(a), almostall human successfully selected the texts with the topic same as example class in each question. This
Table 7: Generated texts for different latent topics in Table 6.		Dataset	Topic ID	Generated Text	1	kobe bryant scored ## points to ## points as no. ## boston Celtics beat the los angeles lakers #### to tie the nba champion2 English Gigaword		tokyo stocks fell tuesday amid fears that consumer prices were cautious as inflation data drove in europe first ahead of a reces- sion	3	three soldiers were killed in a remote village in the north's deadly suicide attack on tuesday	1	teeth on the rock is the only release by the japanese rock band ## on 25 march 201DBpedia	2	the ## temple in portland oregon is located in ## n ## it is listed in the national register of historic places in 1998	3	## ## born march 17 1986 is a IithUanian professional basket- ball player for the ## national basketball leagueReferencesMartin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Lon Bottou. Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprintarXiv:1701.07875, 2017.
