Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Representation learning for improved inter-
PRETABILITY AND CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF
clinical factors from EEG
GarrettHonke** X, the Moonshot Factory Mountain View, CA	Irina Higgins** DeepMind London, UK	Nina Thigpen* * * X, the Moonshot Factory Mountain View, CA, USA
Vladimir Miskovic* X, the Moonshot Factory Mountain View, CA, USA	Katie Link* X, the Moonshot Factory Mountain View, CA, USA	Sunny Duan* DeepMind Mountain View, CA, USA
Pramod Gupta* X, the Moonshot Factory Mountain View, CA, USA	Julia KlaWohn^ Florida State University Tallahassee, FL, USA	Greg Hajcak§ Florida State University Tallahassee, FL, USA
Ab stract
Despite extensive standardization, diagnostic interviews for mental health disorders
encompass substantial subjective judgment. Previous studies have demonstrated
that EEG-based neural measures can function as reliable objective correlates of
depression, or even predictors of depression and its course. However, their clinical
utility has not been fully realized because of 1) the lack of automated ways to
deal with the inherent noise associated with EEG data at scale, and 2) the lack of
knowledge of which aspects of the EEG signal may be markers of a clinical disorder.
Here we adapt an unsupervised pipeline from the recent deep representation learning
literature to address these problems by 1) learning a disentangled representation
using β-VAE to denoise the signal, and 2) extracting interpretable features associated
with a sparse set of clinical labels using a Symbol-Concept Association Network
(SCAN). We demonstrate that our method is able to outperform the canonical
baseline classification method on a number of factors, including participant age and
depression diagnosis. Furthermore, our method recovers a representation that can be
used to automatically extract denoised Event Related Potentials (ERPs) from novel,
single EEG trajectories, and supports fast supervised re-mapping to various clinical
labels, allowing clinicians to re-use a single EEG representation regardless of
updates to the standardized diagnostic system. Finally, single factors of the learned
disentangled representations often correspond to meaningful markers of clinical
factors, as automatically detected by SCAN, allowing for human interpretability
and post-hoc expert analysis of the recommendations made by the model.
1	Introduction
Mental health disorders make up one of the main causes of the overall disease burden worldwide
(Vos et al., 2013), with depression (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, MDD) believed to be the second
leading cause of disability (Lozano et al., 2013; Whiteford et al., 2013), and around 17% of the
population experiencing its symptoms at some point throughout their lifetime (McManus et al., 2016;
2009; Kessler et al., 1993; Lim et al., 2018). At the same time diagnosing mental health disorders
has many well-identified limitations (Insel et al., 2010). Despite the existence of diagnostic manuals
* Equal contribution
*{ghonk,irinah,nthigpen,vmiskovic,katielink,sunnyd,pramodg}@google.com
打KiS now at Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; julia.klawohn@hu-berlin.de
§greg.hajcak@med.fsu.edu
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Neutral IAPS image
examples:
Positive IAPS image
examples:
trajectories from single
participant
reconstruction
mean
β-VAE∕AE
口口
_ _ _.................................................................,1—1
D D
SCAN
Training pathway
Classification
from ERP∕EEG
Post-hoc classification
analysis
g(y; w, y)
β-VAE∕AE
encoder
qφ(Zχ∣χ)
Age
Gender
Depression
Site
β-VAE∕AE
decoder
P 招ZX)
・□ 口■ ■□
β-VAE∕AE
reconstruction
f(x；仇 Φ)
ERP
reconstruction
Axis 1
SCAN input (y)
Figure 1: Pipeline schematic. Participants are presented with images from the International Affective
Picture System (IAPS). EEG trajectories recorded from the same participant over multiple trials are
averaged to create ERPs. Each EEG sample consists of 256 time samples (-248-772 ms, where 0 is
stimulus onset time) of stimulus-locked activity recorded from three sites as participants view either
neutral (red) or positive (blue) IAPS images. ERP responses to positive and negative images are
concatenated and normalised between [0,1] across all channels simultaneously. The resulting “images”
are used to train β-VAE or AE. A well disentangled pre-trained β-VAE model is used to train SCAN.
Each SCAN training example consists of a 5-hot binary classification label y presented to the SCAN
encoder, and its corresponding EEG “image” X presented to the β-VAE encoder. β-VAE weights are
fixed during SCAN training. To obtain classification, an EEG “image” is presented to the β-VAE
encoder, then the inferred Zx means are fed through the SCAN decoder, where a per-class softmax is
applied to obtain the predicted label (red pathway). To analyse SCAN classification decisions, a 1-hot
binary vector is fed into SCAN encoder. Samples from the inferred distribution zy are then fed through
the β-VAE decoder to visualise the corresponding ERP reconstructions (purple pathway).
like Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (SCID)
(DSM-V, 2013), diagnostic consistency between expert psychiatrists and psychologists with decades
of professional training can be low, resulting in different diagnoses in upwards of 30% of the cases
(Cohen,s Kappa = 0.66) (Lobbestael et al., 2011). Even if higher inter-rater reliability was achieved,
many psychological disorders do not have a fixed symptom profile, with depression alone having
many hundreds of possible symptom combinations (Fried & Nesse, 2015). This means that any two
people with the same SCID diagnosis can exhibit entirely different symptom expressions. This is a
core challenge for developing an objective, symptom-driven diagnostic tool in this domain.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a measurement of post-synaptic electrical potentials that can be taken
non-invasively at the scalp. EEG signals can function as important biomarkers of clinical disorders
(Hajcak et al., 2019) but they are difficult to clean and interpret at scale. For example, components of the
EEG signal can often significantly overlap or interfere with each other. Furthermore, nearby electronics,
line noise, hardware quality, signal drift and other variations in the electrode-scalp connection can
all distort the recorded EEG signal. Hence, the extraction of EEG data of sufficient quality is usually
a laborious, semi-automated process executed by lab technicians with extensive training. A typical
EEG analysis pipeline consists of collecting EEG recordings evoked from a large number of stimulus
presentations (trials) in order to have sufficient data to average out the noise. Independent Components
Analysis (ICA) is often used to visually identify and remove the component that corresponds to eye
blinks (Delorme & Makeig, 2004; Makeig et al., 2004; Jung et al., 2000) (although see Weber et al.
(2020); Nolan et al. (2010) as examples of fully automated artifact removal pipelines). This can be
followed by a trial rejecton stage where anomalous trials are identified and removed from the EEG
data scroll, sometimes also through visual examination. The cleaned up EEG recordings from a large
number of trials are then averaged to produce an Event Related Potential (ERP) (Luck, 2012). This
allows a clinician to extract specific ERP components relevant to the clinical factor of interest, average
out the event-locked activity within them, and then either perform a statistical group comparison, or-in
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
the case of the diagnosis classification goal—apply an off-the-shelf classifier, like Logistic Regression
(LR) to obtain the final diagnostic results. Some more advanced classification approaches might include
Support Vector Machines (SVM), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), or Random Forest (RF) (Parvar
et al., 2015; Guler & Ubeyli, 2007; Subasi & Gursoy,2010; Tomioka et al.,2007; Bashivan et al.,2016).
To summarise, EEG recordings are noisy measures of electric activity from across the brain. There
is evidence that these signals are useful as markers of depression, but we lack understanding of
what aspects of depression they index. Furthermore, the field of clinical psychopathology still lacks
consensus on the etiopathogenesis of mental health disorders, which means that there is no such thing
as the “ground truth” diagnostic labels. Hence, while EEG is routinely used to diagnose conditions like
epilepsy (Smith, 2005), memory (Stam et al., 1994) or sleep disorders (Karakis et al., 2012), its promise
for being a reliable diagnostic tool for clinical conditions like depression has not been fully realised so
far. In order to make EEG a viable diagnostic tool for a broader set of clinical conditions itis important
to have an automated pipeline for extracting the relevant interpretable biomarker correlates from the
(preferably individual trial) EEG data in a robust manner. Furthermore, this process should not depend
fully on diagnostic labels which are often subjective and at best represent highly heterogeneous classes.
Recent advances in deep learning have prompted research into end-to-end classification of EEG signal
using convolutional and/or recurrent neural networks (Bashivan et al., 2016; Mirowski et al., 2009;
Cecotti & Graser, 2011; Guler et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2018; Farahat et al., 2019; Solon et al., 2019;
Cecotti et al., 2014), holding the promise of automated extraction of relevant biomarker correlates.
However, deep classifiers operate best in the big data regime with clean, well-balanced ground truth
classification targets. In contrast, even the largest of EEG datasets typically contain only afew hundred
datapoints, and the classification labels are subjective, noisy and unbalanced, with the majority of
the data coming from healthy control participants. Hence, in order to utilise the benefits of deep
learning but avoid the pitfalls of over-reliance on the classification labels, we propose a two-step
pipeline consisting of unsupervised representation learning, followed by supervised mapping of the
pre-trained representation to the latest version of the available diagnostic labels. The hope is that the
unsupervised learning step would denoise the input signal and extract the broad statistical regularities
hidden in it thus serving as an alternative for the existing automatic EEG pre-processing pipelines
(Weber et al., 2020; Nolan et al., 2010) while minimising the need for a priori knowledge , resulting
in a representation that can continue tobe useful even if the label taxonomy evolves.
Recently great progress has been made in the field of deep unsupervised representation learning (Roy
et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a; Higgins et al., 2017; Burgess et al., 2019). Disentangled representation learning is a branch
of deep unsupervised learning that produces interpretable factorised low-dimensional representations
of the training data (Bengio et al., 2013; Higgins et al., 2017). Given the requirement for model
interpretability in our use-case, we use Beta Variational Autoencoders (β-VAE) (Higgins et al.,
2017)—one of the state of the art unsupervised disentangled representation learning methods—to
discover low-dimensional disentangled representations of the EEG data. We then train the recently
proposed Symbol-Concept Association Network (SCAN) (Higgins et al., 2018) to map the available
classification labels to the representations learnt by β-VAE (see Fig. 1). We demonstrate that our
proposed pipeline results in better classification accuracy than the typical approach for extracting
a known ERP pattern for use as a biomarker—a process that is often heavily influenced by a priori
knowledge. This holds true when predicting a number of factors, including age, gender, and
depression diagnosis. Furthermore, SCAN is able to produce arguably interpretable classification
recommendations, whereby its decisions on different clinical factors are grounded in a small number
(often single) latent dimensions of the β-VAE, allowing the clinicians an opportunity to interpret the
recommendations produced by SCAN, and visualise what aspects of the EEG signal are associated
with the classification decision post-hoc. This opens up the opportunity to use our proposed pipeline as
a tool for discovering new EEG biomarkers. We validate this by “re-discovering” a known biomarker
for depression. Finally, we demonstrate that once a β-VAE is pre-trained on ERP signals, it can
often produce ERP-like reconstructions even when presented with single noisy EEG trajectories.
Furthermore, the representations inferred from single EEG trials produce good classification results,
still outperforming the canonical baseline method. This suggests that once a good disentangled
representation is learnt, the model can be used online as new EEG data is being recorded, thus lowering
the burden of keeping potentially vulnerable participants in the lab for extended recording sessions.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
2	Methods
2.1	Data
Anhedonia. This work targets one of the two cardinal symptoms of depression—anhedonia.
Anhedonia is the lack of pleasure and/or interest in previously pleasurable stimuli and activities
(DSM-V, 2013). One established approach for objectively quantifying this symptom is the use of
EEG to measure neural responses elicited by emotionally salient visual stimuli. Research in this
domain has uncovered a stereotyped neural activation pattern in healthy control participants, where
emotionally-salient stimuli evoke a Late Positive Potential (LPP) in ERPs—the averaged timeseries
of stimulus time-locked EEG recordings. This pattern has been identified as a potential biomarker
for depression because (on average) this positive deflection in amplitude is attenuated or absent in
individuals who exhibit symptoms of anhedonia (Brush et al., 2018; Foti et al., 2010; Klawohn et al.,
2020; MacNamara et al., 2016; Weinberg et al., 2016; Weinberg & Shankman, 2017).
Participants. The data were collected as part of a mental health study across multiple laboratory
sites. The multi-site aspect of the study meant that more data could be pooled together, however, it
also meant that the data was noisier. Participants (N = 758, ageχ = 16.7, age^ = [11.0, 59.8], 398
female) were samples of healthy controls (nHC = 485) and people diagnosed with depression (among
other mental illnesses) (see Sec. A.1.1 and Tbl. A1 for further breakdown).
Stimuli and Experimental Design. Participants were shown a series of 80 images from the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS) (Lang et al., 2008) presented in random order up to 40
times each. The images varied in valence: either positive (affiliative scenes or cute animals designed to
elicit the LPP ERP component), or neutral (objects or scenes with people). Each image trial consisted
of a white fixation cross presented for a random duration between 1000-2000 ms (square window)
followed by a black and white image presented for 1000 ms.
EEG Preprocessing. While participants completed the picture viewing task, EEG was continuously
recorded. Each picture trial was then segmented to contain a 200 ms pre-stimulus baseline and a
1200 ms post-stimulus interval. The raw EEG signal was digitized, bandpass filtered and cleared of
the eye movement artifacts and anomalous trials as described in Sec. A.1.2.
Classification labels. The following classification labels were used in this study: age (adult or
child), gender (male or female), study site, and the presence or absence of two clinical conditions:
depression diagnosis and a broader Axis 1 disorder diagnosis. All classification labels were binary,
apart from study site, which contained four possible values corresponding to four different sites where
the data were collected. Participants 18 years of age and older were classified as adults. Gender was
classified based on self-reported values. Positive depression labels (n= 110) include all participants
that were diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), Persistent Depressive Disorder (PDD),
and depressive disorder NOS (not-otherwise-specified) by expert clinicians through a clinical interview
(e.g., SCID for adults, KSADS for children). Axis 1 is a broad category consisting of the most prevalent
psychological disorders in the population (now discontinued in DSM-V) that excludes intellectual
disabilities and personality disorder (DSM-V, 2013). Positive Axis 1 labels (n = 273) encompassed all
participants with positive depression labels plus individuals diagnosed with Cyclothemia, Dysthemia,
anxiety disorders, mood disorders (e.g., Bipolar Disorder), panic disorders, and substance and eating
disorders (all of which are sparse). The Axis 1 class is provided to compare model behavior on a
transdiagnostic measurement of psychopathology.1 While recruitment for the study was primarily
focused on depression, the SCID produces a large set of diagnostic decisions, and we collapsed
this sparser set of positive diagnoses into the existing Axis 1 DSM-IV superordinate category. We
include this label in modeling and analysis to maximize the number of positive labels for training and
evaluation and to give the reader a sense of what the algorithm may have learned that is generalizable
across disorders—akin to the P factor (Caspi et al., 2014).
1Disorders in this class that are present in the data include Major Depressive Disorder, Persistent Depressive
Disorder, Depression NOS, Cyclothemia, Dysthemia, Bipolar I, Bipolar II, Bipolar NOS, Mania, Hypomania,
Agoraphobia, Social Phobia, Separation Anxiety, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Panic Disorder, Panic Disorder
with Agoraphobia, Anorexia, Bulimia, Eating disorder NOS, Alcohol Abuse, Alcohol Dependence, and Substance
Abuse and Substance Dependence disorders.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
2.2	Representation learning
Canonical LPP analysis baseline The canonical approach for extracting the Late Positive Potential
(LPP) effect serves as the baseline for this work. The LPP effect is calculated as the average amplitude
difference between ERP waveforms (i.e., averaged stimulus time-locked EEG segments) evoked from
emotionally-salient and neutral stimuli. Before the delta was calculated, each ERP was normalised
with respect to the baseline average activity within the 100 ms window preceding stimulus onset.
Finally, the normalised delta signal within the 300-700 ms window after stimulus onset was averaged
to provide the canonical baseline LPP representation.
Autoencoder An AutoEncoder (AE) is a deep neural network approach for non-linear dimensionality
reduction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Baldi, 2012). A typical architecture consists ofan encoder
network, which projects the input high-dimensional data x into a low-dimensional representation
z, and a decoder network that is the inverse of the encoder, projecting the representation z back into
the reconstruction of the original high-dimensional data f(x; φ,θ), where φ and θ are the parameters
of the encoder and decoder respectively (see Fig. 1 for model schematic). AE is trained through
backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986) using the reconstruction objective:
LAE = Ep(x) ||f (x; φ,θ) -x||2
The input to the AE in our case is a 256x6 “image” of the EEG signal (see Fig. 1), where 256
corresponds to the 1024 ms of the recorded EEG trajectory sampled at 250 Hz and pre-processed
as described in Sec. A.1.2, and 6 corresponds to three electrodes per each of the two image valence
conditions (i.e., stimulus classes): neutral and positive. These input images were further normalised
to the [0, 1] range across all channels before being presented to the AE.
The AE was parametrised to have two convolutional encoding layers with 32 filters each of size 6,
with strides of step size 2 along the time axis, followed by a single fully connected layer of size 128,
projecting into a 10-dimensional representation z. The decoder was the inverse of the encoder. Overall
the model consisted of around 106,752 parameters. The model had ReLU activations throughout, and
was optimised using Adam optimizer with learning rate of 1e-4 over 1 mln iterations of batch size 16.
β-Variational Autoencoder A β-Variational Autoencoder (β-VAE) (Higgins et al., 2017) is a gen-
erative model that aims to learn a disentangled latent representation z of input data xby augmenting
the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014) (see
Sec.A.2.1 for more details) with an additional β hyperparameter. Intuitively, a disentangled representa-
tion is a factorised latent distribution where each factor corresponds to an interpretable transformation
of the training data (e.g. in a disentangled representation of a visual scene, individual factors may
represent a change in lighting or object position). A neural network implementation of a β-VAE consists
of an inference network (equivalent to the AE encoder), that takes inputs x and parameterises the
(disentangled) posterior distribution q(z|x), and a generative network (equivalent to the AE decoder)
that takes a sample from the inferred posterior distribution z 〜N(μ(z∣x),σ(z∣x)) and attempts to
reconstruct the original image (see Fig. 1). The model is trained through a two-part loss objective:
Le-VAE = Ep(X)[Eqφ(z∣χ)[logPθ(x|z)]-βKL(qφ(z∖X) ||p(z))]
where p(x) is the probability of the input data, q(z|x) is the learnt posterior over the latent units
given the data, p(z) is the unit Gaussian prior with a diagonal covariance matrix N (0, I), φ and θ
are the parameters of the inference (encoder) and generative (decoder) networks respectively, and
β is a hyperparameter that controls the degree of disentangling achieved by the model during training.
Intuitively, the objective consists of the reconstruction term (which aims to increase the log-likelihood
of the observations) and a compression term (which aims to reduce the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the inferred posterior and the prior). Typically a β > 1 is necessary to achieve
good disentangling, however the exact value differs for different datasets. In order to find a good value
ofβ to disentangle our EEG dataset, we perform a hyperparameter search, training ten models with
different random initialisations for each of the ten values ofβ∈ [0.075, 2.0] sampled uniformly. Well
disentangled β-VAE models were selected using the Unsupervised Disentanglement Ranking (UDR)
score (Duan et al., 2019) described in Sec. A.4 (see Fig. A1 for a visualisation of the resulting UDR
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ERP/ERP ERP/SMPL SMPL/ERP	SMPL/SMPL	ERP/ERP ERP/SMPL SMPL/ERP	SMPL/SMPL	ERP/ERP ERP/SMPL SMPL/ERP	SMPL/SMPL
Figure 2: Posterior distribution of balanced classification accuracy (mean, error bars - 95% confidence
interval) (Carrillo et al., 2014; Brodersen et al., 2010). ERP - averaged trajectories, SMPL - single
sampled EEG trials. LPP - canonical late positive potential baseline representation. LR - L2 regularised
logistic regression (see Tbl. A2 for other baseline classifiers). Models trained on single EEG trajectories
(SMPL) are tested on different single EEG trajectories in the SMPL/SMPL train/test case. Black
horizontal line - chance accuracy, horizontal dashed lines - 95% confidence interval calculated according
to Muller-Putz etal. (2008).
scores). All β-VAE models had the same architecture as the AE2, and were trained in the same manner
and on the same data that was pre-processed in the same way to lie in the [0, 1] range .
2.3	Classification
Baseline classifiers To evaluate the quality of a representation in terms of how useful it is for
classifying different clinical factors, we applied a range of baseline classification algorithms: Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR) and Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) (see Sec. A.3 for details). For all classification results we report the posterior
distribution of balanced accuracy (Carrillo et al., 2014; Brodersen et al., 2010). Balanced accuracy was
chosen, because it correctly matches chance accuracy even for unbalanced datasets. Chance accuracy
and its confidence bounds were calculated according to Muller-Putz et al. (2008).
Symbol-Concept Association Network The baseline classifiers described above produced uninter-
pretable decisions. This is undesirable ifwe were to have a chance at discovering new clinical biomark-
ers in the EEG data. To address this interpretability challenge, we leverage a recent model proposed for
visual concept learning in the machine learning literature-the Symbol-Concept Association Network
(SCAN) (Higgins et al., 2018). While SCAN was not originally developed with the classification goal in
mind, it has desirable properties to utilise for the current application. In particular, itis able to automat-
ically discover sparse associative relationships between discrete symbols (5-hot classification labels in
our case, see Fig. 1) and continuous probability distributions of the disentangled posterior representation
discovered by a trained β-VAE model. Furthermore, the associative nature of the grounding used to train
SCAN allows itto deal with noisy data gracefully, and to learn successfully from a small number of pos-
itive examples and from highly unbalanced datasets. SCAN is in effect another VAE model. In our case
it takes 5-hot classification labels y as input, and aims to reconstruct them from the inferred posterior
q(z|y) (see Fig. 1 for more details). To train SCAN the original VAE objective is augmented with an ad-
ditional KL term that aims to ground the SCAN posterior in the posterior of a pre-trained β-VAE model:
LSCAN = Ep(y) [ Eqψ (Zy M [log PY (y∖zy )] - KL® (Zy Iy) || P(Zy))] - KLSφ(Zx Ix) || qψ (Zy Iy))]
2Note that the AE can be seen as a special case of the β-VAE with β=0.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ERP inputs	Reconstructions	smpl inputs
Figure 3: Reconstructions (middle six columns) by two disentangled β-VAEs pre-trained on either
ERPs or single EEG sample trajectories (SMPL), as well as an AE pre-trained on ERPs. Each model
reconstructs either single EEG trajectories (SMPL inputs) or the corresponding ERPs (ERP inputs).
Models pre-trained on ERPs are able to reconstruct ERP-like trajectories even from single EEG samples,
as demonstrated by the closer similarity of the β-VAEs (ERP) and AE (ERP) reconstructions to ERP
inputs compared to SMPL inputs, regardless of whether ERPs or single EEG samples are reconstructed.
where ψ and γ are the parameters of the SCAN encoder and decoder respectively, qψ (zy |y) is the
posterior of SCAN inferred from a 5-hot label y, and qφ(Zx |x) is the posterior of the pre-trained
β-VAE model inferred from an EEG “image” corresponding to the label presented to SCAN.
Note that the β-VAE weights are not updated during SCAN training. The extra grounding term
KL(qφ (Zx |x) || qψ (Zy |y)) allows SCAN to discover an associative relationship between a subset of
disentangled factors and each 1-hot dimension of the given label.
We paramterised SCAN encoder and decoder as MLPs with two hidden layers of size 128, ReLU
non-linearities anda 10-dimensional posterior to match the dimensionality of the β-VAE representation.
The model resulted in around 22,016 parameters. Like the other models, SCAN was trained with batch
size 16, over 1 mln iterations and with Adam optimizer with learning rate of 1e-4.
3	Results
Deep representation learning improves classification accuracy. We evaluated the classification
accuracy for predicting participant age, gender, study site, and the presence or absence of two
clinical labels: depression and Axis 1. We first obtained the canonical LPP representations, and
applied Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR) and Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) to obtain balanced classification accuracy. Table A2 and Figure A2 show
that LR produced some of the best results overall for the baseline, hence we report only LR results
for the β-VAE and AE representations in the main text (see Tables A3-A4 and Figures A3-A4 for the
other classifiers applied to the β-VAE and AE representations). Figures 2 and 5 (ERP/ERP train/test
condition) demonstrate that representations extracted through β-VAE and AE pretraining resulted
in higher overall classification accuracy than those obtained through the baseline canonical LPP
pipeline (see also Table A5 ERP/ERP cells). This effect holds across all classification tasks, including
depression and Axis 1 diagnoses. Furthermore, the pattern of classification results is in line with what
might have been expected by the expert clinicians, whereby age and depression classification accuracy
is significantly higher than chance, while gender is harder to decode from the EEG signal.
A similar pattern appears to hold in most cases when all the models are trained on single EEG trials
instead of ERPs (SMPL/ERP train/test in Figures 2 and 5, see also Table A5). While the maximum
classification accuracy drops for all models when trained from the noisier single EEG trials rather than
ERPs, the classification accuracy obtained from β-VAE and AE representations is still often higher
than that obtained from the LPP baseline.
Classification based on deep representations generalises better to single EEG trials. One
possible clinical application of the proposed classification pipeline is to enable online diagnosis
recommendations from single EEG trials. Hence, we tested how well the classification accuracy of
the different representations generalises to novel single EEG trial trajectories (*/SMPL in Figures 2
and 5, see also SMPL columns in Tbl. A5). As expected, the performance often drops when classifying
the noisy single EEG trajectories, regardless whether the representations were pre-trained using
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
No depression
Zl
z2
z3
z4
z5
z6
z7
z8
z9
z10
A -2
Latent traversal
Gender
Axis 1
Depression
Depression
Study site
φ
Q-
E
E
ω
N
<
ω
ω
Figure 4: A: Latent traversals of a pre-trained disentangled β-VAE. Each row reconstructs an ERP
trajectory as the value of each latent dimension is traversed between [-2, 2] while keeping the values of
all other latents fixed. B: Inferred distributions for each of the 10 latent dimensions of a SCAN trained
with the β-VAE shown in A. Each subplot shows the result of SCAN inference on a set of 1-hot symbols
corresponding to all the different conditions of a single factor (e.g. M/F for Gender). Different factors
have automatically become associated with different (often single) latent dimensions. For example, the
presence (red) or absence (blue) of Axis 1 diagnosis is represented by the narrow inferred Gaussian
distributions centered around different opposite values of latent z9, while other latent dimensions are
defaulted back to the unit Gaussian prior. C: five samples from each of the two conditions associated
with the depression factor from the SCAN shown in B, as well as corresponding ERP samples from the
training dataset . Red - neutral responses, blue - pleasant responses from each of the three EEG sensors.
SCAN has automatically discovered that the presence of depression is associated with the lack of clear
separation between responses in the two valence conditions—anhedonia. Its samples are qualitatively
similar to the samples from the dataset.
—Site 1
一Site 2
一Site 3
Site 4
ERPs (ERP/SMPL) or single EEG samples (SMPL/SMPL, note that we tested the models with
different single EEG samples to those used for training). However, the classification accuracy is still
often significantly higher for deep representations compared to the LPP baseline. This suggests that
replacing the more manual canonical LPP pipeline with deep representation learning can allow for
both better training data efficiency and a reduction in time that the (potentially vulnerable) participants
have to spend in the lab by up to 37x, which is the average number of trials per condition that made
it through EEG pre-processing in our dataset and were used for generating ERPs.
Deep representation learning reconstructs ERPs from single EEG trials. Since β-VAE and AE
had good classification accuracy when presented with single EEG samples, we tested whether they
could also reconstruct ERPs from single EEG trials. Figure 3 shows that this is indeed the case—
reconstructions produced by the pre-trained models from single noisy EEG samples look remarkably
similar to those produced from the corresponding ERPs (also see Figs. A5-A7 for more examples). Note
that this only holds true for models trained using ERP data and not those trained on single EEG samples.
Disentangled representations allow for interpretable classification. To obtain SCAN classifica-
tion results, We inferred the posterior qφ (Zx | x) of a pre-trained β-VAE in response to an EEG “image” x.
We then used the pre-trained SCAN decoder to obtain the reconstructed label logits pγ(y∣μ(zx)) using
the β-VAE posterior mean as input (Fig. 1, red path). Finally, we applied softmax over the produced
logits to obtain the predicted 5-hot label for the EEG “image”. When SCAN was trained on top of a well
disentangled β-VAE, it was often able to outperform the canonical LPP baseline in terms of classifica-
tion accuracy (see Figure 2 and Table A5, SCAN+β-VAE). This is despite the fact that SCAN was not
developed with the classification goal in mind. Note, however, that SCAN can only work when trained
with disentangled representations. Indeed, SCAN classification performance was in most conditions
not distinguishable from chance when trained on top of entangled AE representations (see Figure 2
and Table A5, SCAN+AE). To further confirm the role of disentanglement, we calculated Spearman
correlation between the quality of disentanglement as measured by the UDR score and the final SCAN
classification accuracy. Table 1 shows significant correlation for age, depression and Axis 1 diagnoses,
suggesting that on average these factors were classified better if representations were more disentangled.
The same, however, is not the case for gender or study site. This implies that some of the better disentan-
gled models did not contain information necessary for classifying these factors. Such information loss is
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Age	Gender	Site	Depression	Axis 1
r	P	rp	r	p	r	p	r	p
0.28	.01	-0.1	.31	0.19	.06	0.33	‹.001	0.31	‹.001
Table 1: Spearman correlation between disentanglement quality (as approximated by UDR score) of
trained β-VAE models (n=100) and balanced classification accuracy from their corresponding SCAN
models.
in fact a known trade-off of β-VAE training, with more disentangled β-VAE models often compromising
on the informativeness of the learnt representation due to the increased compression pressure induced
by the higher β values necessary to achieve disentanglement (Higgins et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2019).
When trained on top of well disentangled β-VAE models, SCAN decisions were not only accurate, but
they were also based on a small number of disentangled dimensions. This is unlike the LR classifier,
which obtained average sparsity of just 3.25% compared to the 87.5% for SCAN, even when L1
regularisation was used. Furthermore, the disentangled dimensions used by SCAN were often arguably
interpretable, hence making SCAN classification decisions amenable to post-hoc analysis. Figure 4B
visualises the inferred SCAN posterior when presented with 1-hot labels corresponding to the male
or female gender, one of the four study sites, and the presence or absence of depression and Axis 1
diagnoses. In most cases, SCAN was able to associate the label with a single latent dimension in the
pre-trained β-VAE (e.g., gender is represented by latent dimension z5), and the different values of
the same class label corresponded to disjoint narrow Gaussians on those latents (e.g., male gender
is represented with a Gaussian N (0.89, 0.49), while female gender is represented by a Gaussian
N (-0.82, 0.52), both on z5). We can also visualise what the different β-VAE latents have learnt to
represent by plotting their traversals as shown in Figure 4A (see more in Figs. A8-A10).
Finally, We can also sample from the SCAN posterior Zy 〜N(μ(zy |y) ,σ(zy |y)) and reconstruct the re-
sulting ERPs using the β-VAE decoder pθ(x∣Zy) (Fig. 1,purple path). SUCh samples for the depression
label are visualised in Figure 4C. Itis clear that the reconstructed ERP samples corresponding to partic-
ipants With a positive depression diagnosis contain no difference betWeen the positive and neutral trials
(overlapping blue and red lines), While those corresponding to participants Without a positive depression
diagnosis do have an obvious gap betWeen the responses to positive and neutral trials. Hence, We Were
able to “re-discover” an objective biomarker for the symptom of anhedonia (and depression generally),
thus opening up the potential for discovering neW biomarkers hidden in EEG data in the future.
4	Conclusion
This Work provides the first evidence that
disentanglement-focused representation learn-
ing and the resulting models are poWerful mea-
surement tools With immediately applicability to
applied and basic research for clinical psychol-
ogy and electrophysiology. One caveat, hoWever,
should be considered: more Work is needed to
further explore hoW this approach could be used
to produce truly meaningful clinical inferences.
ToWard that goal, this study is limited because of
(1) the choice to focus analysis on the superordi-
nate depression class as opposed its constituent
disorders, (2) the use of Axis 1 as a point of com-
parison as opposed to a similarly represented co-
morbid disorder, and (3) the choice to train mod-
els Without betWeen-participant cross-validation.
Clearly, there is a need for folloW-up Work to
examine factors that have more clinical impact
such as differences in types of depression (persis-
tent vs. major depressive disorder) and treatment
response.
We have demonstrated that disentangled repre-
sentation learning can be successfully applied to
ERP/ERP
ERP/SMPL
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8 LO
SMPL/SMPL
SMPL/ERP
Figure 5: Precision-recall curves for balanced clas-
sification accuracy of depression diagnosis calcu-
lated as the average of precision and recall for L2
regularised logistic regression. ERP - averaged
trajectories, SMPL - single sampled EEG trajecto-
ries. LPP - canonical late positive potential baseline
representation. Models trained on single EEG tra-
jectories (SMPL) are tested on different single EEG
trajectories in the SMPL/SMPL train/test case.
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8 LO
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
EEG data, resulting in representations that can
be successfully re-used to predict multiple clinical factors through fast supervised re-mapping, out-
performing a baseline typical for the field. Our method recovers a representation that can be used to
automatically extract denoised Event Related Potentials (ERPs) from novel, single EEG trajectories.
Finally, single factors of the learned disentangled representations often correspond to meaningful mark-
ers of clinical factors (as automatically detected by SCAN), allowing for human interpretability and
potentially providing novel insight into new biomarkers and the neurofunctional alterations underlying
mental disorders. While SCAN does not always produce statistically-reliable accuracy advantages
over more traditional methods (all using β-VAE encoding), the ability to show the user exactly how
patterns in the raw data manifest across clinical groups of interest is a considerable advantage.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sarah Laszlo, Gabriella Levine, Phil Watson, Obi Felten, Mustafa Ispir, Edward De Brouwer,
the Amber team, Nader Amir and the Center for Understanding and Treating Anxiety, Dr. Kristen
Schmidt, Alec Bruchnak, and Nicholas Santopetro.
References
Pierre Baldi. Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures. In Proceedings of ICML
workshop on Unsupervised and transfer learning, pp. 37-49,2012.
Pouya Bashivan, Irina Rish, Mohammed Yeasin, and Noel Codella. Learning representations from
EEG with deep recurrent-convolutional neural networks. ICLR, 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Gregoire MesniL Yann Dauphin, and Salah Rifai. Better mixing via deep representa-
tions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 552-560, 2013.
K. H. Brodersen, C. S. Ong, K. E. Stephan, and J. M. Buhmann. The balanced accuracy and its posterior
distribution. In 2010 20th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 3121-3124, 2010.
doi: 10.1109/ICPR.2010.764.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Christopher J Brush, Peter J Ehmann, Greg Hajcak, Edward A Selby, and Brandon L Alderman. Using
multilevel modeling to examine blunted neural responses to reward in major depression. Biological
Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 3(12):1032-1039, 2018.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
and Alexander Lerchner. MoNET: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Henry Carrillo, Kay H Brodersen, and Jose A Castellanos. Probabilistic performance evaluation
for multiclass classification using the posterior balanced accuracy. In ROBOT2013: First Iberian
Robotics Conference, pp. 347-361. Springer, 2014.
Avshalom Caspi, Renate M Houts, Daniel W Belsky, Sidra J Goldman-Mellor, HonaLee Harrington,
Salomon Israel, Madeline H Meier, Sandhya Ramrakha, Idan Shalev, Richie Poulton, et al. The
p factor: one general psychopathology factor in the structure of psychiatric disorders? Clinical
Psychological Science, 2(2):119-137, 2014.
Hubert Cecotti and Axel Graser. Convolutional neural networks for P300 detection with application to
brain-computer interfaces. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(3):
433-445, 2011.
Hubert Cecotti, Miguel P Eckstein, and Barry Giesbrecht. Single-trial classification of event-related
potentials in rapid serial visual presentation tasks using supervised spatial filtering. IEEE transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 25(11):2030-2042, 2014.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeff Wu, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, David Luan,
and Ilya Sutskever. Generative pretraining from pixels. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05709, 2020b.
Arnaud Delorme and Scott Makeig. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG
dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1):
9-21,2004.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
DSM-V. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. American Psychiatric Association,
Washington, DC, 5 edition, 2013.
Sunny Duan, Loic Matthey, Andre Saraiva, Nicholas Watters, Christopher P Burgess, Alexander Lerch-
ner, and Irina Higgins. Unsupervised model selection for variational disentangled representation
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12614, 2019.
Amr Farahat, Christoph Reichert, Catherine M Sweeney-Reed, and Hermann Hinrichs. Convolu-
tional neural networks for decoding of covert attention focus and saliency maps for EEG feature
visualization. Journal of Neural Engineering, 16(6):066010, 2019.
Dan Foti, Doreen M Olvet, Daniel N Klein, and Greg Hajcak. Reduced electrocortical response to
threatening faces in major depressive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27(9):813-820, 2010.
Eiko I Fried and Randolph M Nesse. Depression is not a consistent syndrome: an investigation of
unique symptom patterns in the STAR* D study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 172:96-102, 2015.
Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A Engemann, Daniel Strohmeier, Christian
Brodbeck, LaUri Parkkonen, and Matti S Hamalainen. Mne software for processing meg and eeg
data. Neuroimage, 86:446-460, 2014.
Gabriele Gratton, Michael GH Coles, and EmanUel Donchin. Anew method for off-line removal of
ocUlar artifact. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 55(4):468-484, 1983.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altcha Corentin Tallec, Pierre H Richemond, Elena
BUchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel GUo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.07733, 2020.
Inan Guler and Elif Derya Ubeyli. Multiclass support vector machines for EEG-signals classification.
IEEE transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 11(2):117-126, 2007.
Nihal Fatma Guler, Elif Derya Ubeyli, and Inan Guler. Recurrent neural networks employing Lyapunov
exponents for EEG signals classification. Expert Systems with Applications, 29(3):506-514, 2005.
Greg Hajcak, Julia Klawohn, and Alexandria Meyer. The utility of event-related potentials in clinical
psychology. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2019.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir
Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. β-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained
variational framework. ICLR, 2(5):6, 2017.
Irina Higgins, Nicolas Sonnerat, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher P Burgess, Matko Bosnjak,
Murray Shanahan, Matthew Botvinick, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. SCAN: Learning
hierarchical compositional visual concepts. ICLR, 2018.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural
networks. Science, 313(5786):504-507, 2006.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Thomas Insel, Bruce Cuthbert, Marjorie Garvey, Robert Heinssen, Daniel S Pine, Kevin Quinn, Charles
Sanislow, and Philip Wang. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework
for research on mental disorders, 2010.
Tzyy-Ping Jung, Scott Makeig, Colin Humphries, Te-Won Lee, Martin J Mckeown, Vicente Iragui,
and Terrence J Sejnowski. Removing electroencephalographic artifacts by blind source separation.
Psychophysiology, 37(2):163-178,2000.
Ioannis Karakis, Keith H Chiappa, Marta San Luciano, Kenneth C Sassower, John W Stakes, and
Andrew J Cole. The utility of routine EEG in the diagnosis of sleep disordered breathing. J Clin
Neurophysiol, 29(4):333-338, 2012.
Ronald C Kessler, Katherine A McGonagle, Marvin Swartz, Dan G Blazer, and Christopher B Nelson.
Sex and depression in the national comorbidity survey i: Lifetime prevalence, chronicity and
recurrence. Journal of affective disorders, 1993.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Julia Klawohn, Kreshnik Burani, Alec Bruchnak, Nicholas Santopetro, and Greg Hajcak. Reduced
neural response to reward and pleasant pictures independently relate to depression. Psychological
Medicine, pp. 1-9, 2020.
Peter J Lang, Margaret M Bradley, and Bruce N Cuthbert. International affective picture system (IAPS):
Technical manual and affective ratings. The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University of
Florida., 1:39-58, 2008.
Grace Y Lim, Wilson W Tam, Yanxia Lu, Cyrus S Ho, Melvyn W Zhang, and Roger C Ho. Prevalence
of depression in the community from 30 countries between 1994 and 2014. Scientific Reports, 8(1):
1-10, 2018.
Jill Lobbestael, Maartje Leurgans, and Arnoud Arntz. Inter-rater reliability of the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV Axis I disorders (SCID I) and Axis II disorders (SCID II). Clinical psychology
& psychotherapy, 18(1):75-79, 2011.
Rafael Lozano, Mohsen Naghavi, Kyle Foreman, Mohammad A AlMazroa, and Ziad A Memish.
Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 (vol 380, pg 2095, 2012). The
Lancet, 381:628-628, 2013.
Steven J Luck. Event-related potentials. American Psychological Association, 2012.
Annmarie MacNamara, Roman Kotov, and Greg Hajcak. Diagnostic and symptom-based predictors of
emotional processing in generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder: An event-related
potential study. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 40(3):275-289, 2016.
Scott Makeig, Stefan Debener, Julie Onton, and Arnaud Delorme. Mining event-related brain dynamics.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(5):204-210, 2004.
Sally McManus, Howard Meltzer, Traolah Brugha, Paul E Bebbington, and Rachel Jenkins. Adult
Psychiatric Morbidity in England 2007: results of a household survey. NHS Information Centre for
Health and Social Care. NHS Information Centre for Health and Social Care, 2009.
Sally McManus, Paul E Bebbington, Rachel Jenkins, and Traolah Brugha. Mental health and wellbeing
in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014. Leeds: NHS Digital, 2016.
Piotr Mirowski, Deepak Madhavan, Yann LeCun, and Ruben Kuzniecky. Classification of patterns of
EEG synchronization for seizure prediction. Clinical Neurophysiology, 120(11):1927-1940, 2009.
Gernot Muller-Putz, Reinhold Scherer, Clemens Brunner, Robert Leeb, and Gert Pfurtscheller. Better
than random: a closer look on bci results. International Journal of Bioelectromagnetism, 10
(ARTICLE):52-55, 2008.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Hugh Nolan, Robert Whelan, and Richard B Reilly. Faster: fully automated statistical thresholding for
eeg artifact rejection. Journal ofneuroScience methods, 192(1):152-162,2010.
Hossein Parvar, Lauren Sculthorpe-Petley, Jason Satel, Rober Boshra, Ryan CN D’Arcy, and Thomas P
Trappenberg. Detection of event-related potentials in individual subjects using support vector
machines. Brain Informatics, 2(1):1-12, 2015.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
approximate inference in deep generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.4082, 2014.
Yannick Roy, Hubert Banville, Isabela Albuquerque, Alexandre Gramfort, Tiago H Falk, and Jocelyn
Faubert. Deep learning-based electroencephalography analysis: a systematic review. Journal of
neural engineering, 16(5):051001, 2019.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088):533-536, 1986.
SJM Smith. EEG in the diagnosis, classification, and management of patients with epilepsy. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 76(suppl 2):ii2-ii7, 2005.
Amelia J Solon, Vernon J Lawhern, Jonathan O Touryan, Jonathan R McDaniel, Anthony J Ries, and
Stephen M Gordon. Decoding P300 variability using convolutional neural networks. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 13:201, 2019.
Kees J Stam, D6nes LJ Tavy, Brechtje Jelles, Herbert AM Achtereekte, Joris PJ Slaets, and Ruud WM
Keunen. Non-linear dynamical analysis of multichannel EEG: clinical applications in dementia and
Parkinson’s disease. Brain Topography, 7(2):141-150, 1994.
Abdulhamit Subasi andM Ismail Gursoy. EEG signal classification using PCA, ICA, LDA and support
vector machines. Expert Systems with Applications, 37(12):8659-8666, 2010.
Ryota Tomioka, Kazuyuki Aihara, and Klaus-Robert Muller. Logistic regression for single trial EEG
classification. In NeurIPS, pp. 1377-1384, 2007.
Theo Vos, Ryan M Barber, Jashua A Salomon, and Christopher J L Murray. Global, regional, and
national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and
injuries in 188 countries, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study.
The Lancet, 386(9995):743-800, 2013.
Haofei Wang, Bertram E. Shi, and Yiwen Wang. Convolutional neural network for target face detection
using single-trial EEG signal. 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 2008-2011, 2018.
Lilian A Weber, Andreea O Diaconescu, Christoph Mathys, Andre Schmidt, Michael Kometer, Franz
Vollenweider, and Klaas E Stephan. Ketamine affects prediction errors about statistical regularities:
a computational single-trial analysis of the mismatch negativity. Journal of Neuroscience, 40(29):
5658-5668, 2020.
Anna Weinberg and Stewart A Shankman. Blunted reward processing in remitted melancholic
depression. Clinical Psychological Science, 5(1):14-25, 2017.
Anna Weinberg, Greg Perlman, Roman Kotov, and Greg Hajcak. Depression and reduced neural
response to emotional images: Distinction from anxiety, and importance of symptom dimensions
and age of onset. Journal of abnormal psychology, 125(1):26, 2016.
Harvey A Whiteford, Louisa Degenhardt, Christopher J L Murray, and Theo Vos. Global burden of
disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 382(9904):1575-1586, 2013.
13