Figure 1: Geometry of gABL near superpositions of shifts of a0 (Kuo et al., 2019). (a) Regions near singleshifts are strongly convex. (b) Regions between two shifts contain a saddle-point, with negative curvaturetowards each shift and positive curvature orthogonally. (c) The span of three shifts. For each figure, the top showsthe function value in height, and the bottom shows function value over the sphere. (d,e) When μs(ao) « 0, theBilinear Lasso gBL (Q) “ minx Ψbl (q, x) and ABL gABL(Q) are empirically similar in the span of three shifts.
Figure 2: Momentum acceleration. a) Iterates of gradient descent oscillate on ill-conditioned functions; eachmarker denotes one iteration. b) Momentum dampens oscillation and speeds up convergence.
Figure 3: BiHnear-lasso objective 夕λ on the sphere SP´1, for P “ 3 and varying λ; brighter colors indicatehigher values. The function landscape of 夕λ flattens as sparse penalty λ decreases from left to right.
Figure 4: Synthetic experiments for Bilinear Lasso. Success probability (a, b): x0 „i.i.d. BRpθq, thesuccess probability of SaS-BD by solving (3), shown by increasing brightness, is large when the sparsityrate θ is sufficiently small compared to the length of a0 , and vice versa. Success with a fixed sparsity rateis more likely when a0 is incoherent. Algorithmic convergence (c, d): iterate convergence for iADM withαk “ pk ´ 1q{pk ` 1q vs. αk “ 0 (ADM); with and without homotopy. Homotopy significantly improvesconvergence rate, and momentum improves convergence when a0 is coherent.
Figure 5: Deconvolution for calcium imaging using Algorithm 2 with iADM and with reweighting (Ap-pendix B). Simulated data: (a) recovered AR2 kernel; (b) estimate of spike train. Real data: (c) reconstructedcalcium signal (d) estimate of spike train. Reweighting improves estimation quality in each case.
Figure 6: Algorithmic comparison. (a) Convergence of various methods minimizing ΨBL with incoherent a0over FFT operations used (for computing convolutions). The y-axis denotes the log of the angle between apkqand the nearest shift of a0 , and each marker denotes five iterations. (b) Convergence for coherent a0 , and (c)with an AR2 kernel for modeling calcium signals.
Figure 7: SaSD for STORM imaging. (a, b) Individual frames (left) and predicted point process map usingSaSD (right). (c, d) shows the original microscopy and the super-resolved image obtained by our method.
Figure 8: Classification of calcium images. (a) Original calcium image; (b) respective kernel estimates; (c)reconstructed images with the (left) neuron and (right) dendrite kernels; (d) respective occurence map estimates.
Figure 9: Data-driven initialization for a: using a piece of the observed data y to generate a good initial pointap0q. Top: data y “ a0 f x0 is a superposition of shifts of the true kernel a0. Bottom: a length-p0 windowcontains pieces of just a few shifts. Bottom-center: one step of the generalized power method approximately fillsin the missing pieces, yielding an initialization that is close to a linear combination of shifts of a0 (right).
Figure 10: Low-dimensional subspheres spanned by shifts of a0. Subfigures (a,b) present the optimizationlandscapes of 夕ABL(a) and 夕BL(a), for a P SpT ∩span{ao,sι [ao],S2 [a。U, with higher values being brighter.
Figure 11: Recovery of xo with '1 -reweighting. (a, b) Truth signals. (c) Solving min。Ψbl(q, x) With noisydata and coherent a0 leads to low-quality estimates of x; (d) performance suffers further when a is a noisyestimate of a0 . (e, f) ReWeighted `1 minimization alleviates this issue significantly.
Figure 12:	Convolutional dictionary learning. Simultaneous recovery for multiple unknoWn kernels{a0,kUN“1 and sparse activation maps {x0,k}N“1 from y “ EN=I a。# f xo,k.
Figure 13:	Estimated PSF for STORM imaging. The left hand side shows the estimated 8 X 8 PSF in 2D,the right hand side visualizes the PSF in 3D.
