Figure 1: Evaluating NAS. Existing frameworks consist of two phases: (a) The search phase, wherea sampler is trained to convergence or a pre-defined stopping criterion; (b) The evaluation phase thattrains the best model from scratch and evaluates it on the test data. Here, we argue that one shouldevaluate the search itself. To this end, as shown in (c), we compare the best architecture found bythe NAS policy with a single uniformly randomly sampled architecture. For this comparison to bemeaningful, we repeat it with different random seeds for both training the NAS sampler and ourrandom search policy. We then report the mean and standard deviations over the different seeds.
Figure 2: Validation perplexity evolution in the12-node RNN search space. (Best viewed in color)3Starting from 1268, which is right after 1267, the seed released by Liu et al. (2019b). Note that, using thisseed, we can reproduce the DARTS RNN search and obtain a validation PPL of 55.7 as in (Liu et al., 2019b).
Figure 3: Architectures discovered by NAS algo-rithms. We rank all 32 architectures in the reducedsearch space based on their performance of individ-ual training, from left (best) to right (worst), andplot the best cell found by three NAS algorithmsacross the 10 random seeds.
Figure 4: Rank disorder due to weight sharing in RNN reduced space. (a) We report the averageand Std over 10 different runs. Note that the rankings significantly differ between using (line plot)and not using WS (bar plot), showing the negative impact of this strategy. (b) We visualize fromleft to right, the best, worst and average cases, and show the corresponding Kendall Tau value. Achange in ranking, indicated by the colors and numbers, is measured as the absolute position changebetween the WS ranking and the true one. For conciseness, We only show the top 10 architectures.
Figure 5: Search space of NAS algorithms. Typically, the search space is encoded as (a) a directedacyclic graph, and an architecture can be represented as (b) a string listing the node ID that each nodeis connected to, or the operation ID employed by each node. (c) An alternatively representation is alist of vectors α of size "n+1) |O|, where n is the number of nodes and O is the set of all operations.
Figure 6: A toy search space to assess the influence of weight sharing in RNN space.
Figure 7: Rank changes while training.
