Figure 1: All adversarial examples have the goal of fooling classifiers while looking “natural”.
Figure 2: An adversarial example built using our Shadow Attack for the smoothed ImageNet classi-fier for which the certifiable classifier produces a large certified radii. The adversarial perturbationis smooth and natural looking even-though it is large when measured using `p -metrics. Also seeFigure 16 in the appendix.
Figure 3: The first 10 steps of optimization (beginning with a randomly perturbed image copy).
Figure 9: Histogram of random-ized smoothed certificate radii for100 randomly sampled CIFAR-10validation images vs those calcu-lated for their adversarial examplescrafted using our 1-channel and 3-channel adversarial Shadow Attackattacks. The “robust” victim clas-sifier is based off Resnet-110, andsmoothed with σ = 0.50. 1-channelattacks are almost as good as theless-restricted 3-channel attacks.
Figure 4: Average Lb (δ) inthe first 10 steps.
Figure 5:	Average TV (δ) inthe first 10 steps.
Figure 6:	Average C(δ) in thefirst 10 steps.
Figure 7: The effect of λs on Figure 8: The effect of λtv onthe resulting Dissim(δ)	the resulting TV (δ)To explore the importance of λs, we use 3-channel attacks and vary λs to produce different imagesin figure 113.
Figure 11: The visual effect of λs on perceptibility of the perturbations. The first row shows thevalue of λs .
Figure 12: The visual effect of λtv on the on imperceptibility of the perturbations. The first rowshows the value of λtv7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Table 2: “Robust error” for natural images, and “attack error” for Shadow Attack images using theCIFAR-10 dataset, and CROWN-IBP models. Smaller is better.
Figure 13: The first 10 steps of the optimization vs the original image for Tiny-CIFAR-10. Seesection 4 for the details of the experiments.
Figure 14: The visual effect of λs on Dissim(δ) on Tiny-CIFAR-10. See section 4 for the detailsof the experiments.
Figure 15: The visual effect of λtv on the perturbation Tiny-CIFAR-10. See section 4 for the detailsof the experiments.
Figure 16: Natural looking Imperceptible ImageNet adversarial images which produce large certi-fied radii for the ImageNet Gaussian smoothed classifier.
