Figure 1: Mode collapse/mixture caused by the discontinuity of the transport map. Top row showsreal data distributions, the bottom row gives the noise distributions. On top, each cluster represents amode, the spurious generated samples are red crosses (mode mixture); at the bottom, red dotted linesare the singularity set, red crosses are mapped to be spurious samples by DNNs. (a) If the support ofʌthe target distribution is convex, DNN (f1) is able to approximate the transport map f1 well. Whenthe support of the target distributions are concave, there are two situations: (b) single mode and (c)ʌmulti modes. In (b), DNN, represented by f2 , cannot approximate the transport map f2 well andgenerates some spurious samples. f3 gives the transport map of multi-mode, when approximating itwith continuous DNNs, either mode collapse f31 or mode mixture f32 will happen.
Figure 2:	AE-OT model. AE: fθ and gξ represent the encoding and decoding maps respectively,where θ and ξ are their corresponding network parameters. In the latent space Z, the latent codes areclustered into three different modes, represented as marks with different shapes (i.e. disks, squaresand circles). OT: The singular set between different modes is plotted with dashed lines. Finally,the generator of our model, which generates realistic images from random noise samples, is thecomposition of the extended OT map T and the decoding map gξ .
Figure 3:	Illustration of the proposed algorithm with two modes in Y . (a) Brenier potential and thecorresponding power diagram. Each cell Wi is mapped to yi, which is the slope of πh,i . The red linein Ω gives the singular set. (b) The extended semi-discrete map. By computing the weighted centerof each cell, and then triangulating the centers according to the power diagram, we get the PL mapT(x) from Ω to Y. If the samples x1 is not in the triangles transverse the singular set, we map it tothe corresponding T(x1) in Y.
Figure 4: Effect of increasing angle threshold θ . (a) shows target distribution. (b) and (c) showsʌ ʌAE-OT results when θ is too small (as in (b)) or too large (as in (c)). (d) shows a proper choice of θthat precisely captured and generalized all modes.
Figure 5: The comparison between the proposed method and the state-of-the-art on MNIST LeCun &Cortes (2010), Fashion MNIST Han Xiao & Vollgraf (2017), Cifar10 Krizhevsky (2009) and CelebAZhang et al. (2018). The first row shows some of the real images in each dataset. The second rowcorresponds to the best results of Lucic et al. (2018); The third row gives the results of Hoshen &Malik (2019); then we display our generating results in the last row.
Figure 6: Figalli’s example: Singularity structure of an optimal transport map, Fig.3.2 in Figalli(2010), Lei et al. (2020).
Figure 7: The generated human faces with the architecture originated from DCGAN Radford et al.
Figure 8: The linear interpolation between given two faces in the dataset.
