Figure 1: Performance with different numbers of paired training samples and settings for λ comparedbetween GAN and FactorGAN with and without dependency modelling.
Figure 3: Examples generated for the Edges2Shoes dataset using 100 paired samplesFigure 2: GAN and FactorGAN output quality estimated by the LS metric for different datasets andnumbers of paired samples. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 2: GAN and FactorGAN output quality estimated by the LS metric for different datasets andnumbers of paired samples. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 4: MSE (left) and accuracy (right) obtained on the Cityscapes dataset with different numbersof paired training samples for the GAN and FactorGANFigure 5: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using 100 paired samples for trainingWhen using only 25 paired samples, FactorGAN reaches 71.6% accuracy, outperforming both GANand CycleGAN by an absolute 17.7% and 14.9%, respectively. CycleGAN performs better than GANonly in this setting, and increasingly falls behind both GAN and FactorGAN with a growing numberof paired samples, likely since GAN and FactorGAN are able to improve their input-output mappinggradually while CycleGAN remains reliant on its cycle consistency assumption. These findingssuggest that FactorGAN can efficiently learn the dependency structure from few paired samples withmore accuracy than a CycleGAN that is limited by its simplistic cycle consistency assumption.
Figure 5: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using 100 paired samples for trainingWhen using only 25 paired samples, FactorGAN reaches 71.6% accuracy, outperforming both GANand CycleGAN by an absolute 17.7% and 14.9%, respectively. CycleGAN performs better than GANonly in this setting, and increasingly falls behind both GAN and FactorGAN with a growing numberof paired samples, likely since GAN and FactorGAN are able to improve their input-output mappinggradually while CycleGAN remains reliant on its cycle consistency assumption. These findingssuggest that FactorGAN can efficiently learn the dependency structure from few paired samples withmore accuracy than a CycleGAN that is limited by its simplistic cycle consistency assumption.
Figure 6: GAN and FactorGAN separation performance for different numbers of paired samplesA.2 Audio source separation experimentFor our audio source separation experiment, our generator Gφ takes a music spectrogram m alongwith noise z and maps it to an estimate of the accompaniment and vocal spectra a and v, implicitlydefining an output probability qφ(a, v|m). We define the joint real and generated distributions thatshould be matched as p(m, a, v) and q(m, a, v) = qφ(a, v|m)p(m). Since the source signals in ourdataset are simply added in the time-domain to produce the mixture, this approximately applies to thespectrogram as well, so we assume that p(m|a, v) = δ(m - a - v). We can constrain our generatorGφ to make predictions that always satisfy this condition, thereby taking care of the input-outputrelationship manually, similarly to S0nderby et al. (2017). Instead of predicting the sources directly, amask b with values in the range [0, 1] is computed, and the accompaniment and vocals are estimatedas b m and (b - 1) m, respectively. As a result, q(m|a, v) = p(m|a, v), so we can simplifythe joint density ratio top(m, a, v)	p(a,	v)p(m|a,	v)	p(a, v)	cP (a, v) p(a)	p(v)—:--------=—:-----：—:—：-----=—:-------=—:------：—:~~：—:——q(m, a, v)	q(a,	v)q(m|a,	v)	q(a, v)	cQ(a, v) q(a)	q(v)(6)meaning that the discriminator(s) in the GAN and the FactorGAN only require (a, v) pairs, but notthe mixture m as additional input, as the correct input-output relationship is already incorporated intothe generator. Furthermore, the last equality suggests a FactorGAN application with one marginal
Figure 7: Paired MNIST examples generated by GAN and FactorGAN for different number of pairedtraining samples, using λ = 0.9.
Figure 8: GAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 100 paired samples.
Figure 9: GAN (big) generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 100 paired samples.
Figure 10: FactorGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 100 paired samples.
Figure 11: GAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 1000 paired samples.
Figure 12: GAN (big) generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 1000 paired samples.
Figure 13: FactorGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset using 1000 paired samples.
Figure 14: GAN generating image pairs using the full Cityscapes dataset.
Figure 15: GAN (big) generating image pairs using the full Cityscapes dataset.
Figure 16: FactorGAN generating image pairs using the full Cityscapes dataset.
Figure 17: Image pairs generated for the Edges2Shoes dataset using 100 paired samples.
Figure 18: Image pairs generated for the Edges2Shoes dataset using 1000 paired samples.
Figure 19: Image pairs generated for the Edges2Shoes dataset using all samples as paired.
Figure 20: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using 100 paired samples for training(b) FactorGANFigure 21: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using 1000 paired samples for training23Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 22: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using all paired samples for training(b) FactorGANFigure 23: CycleGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset without any paired samples.
Figure 21: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using 1000 paired samples for training23Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Figure 22: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using all paired samples for training(b) FactorGANFigure 23: CycleGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset without any paired samples.
Figure 22: Segmentation predictions made on the Cityscapes dataset for the same set of test inputs,compared between models, using all paired samples for training(b) FactorGANFigure 23: CycleGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset without any paired samples.
Figure 23: CycleGAN generating image pairs for the Cityscapes dataset without any paired samples.
