Figure 1: Proposed architecture. The basic building block is a multi-layer FC network with ReLunonlinearities. It predicts basis expansion coefficients both forward, θf, (forecast) and backward, θb,(backcast). Blocks are organized into stacks using doubly residual stacking principle. A stack mayhave layers with shared gb and gf . Forecasts are aggregated in hierarchical fashion. This enablesbuilding a very deep neural network with interpretable outputs.
Figure 2: The outputs of generic and the interpretable configurations, M4 dataset. Each row is onetime series example per data frequency, top to bottom (Yearly: id Y3974, Quarterly: id Q11588,Monthly: id M19006, Weekly: id W246, Daily: id D404, Hourly: id H344). The magnitudes in a roware normalized by the maximal value of the actual time series for convenience. Column (a) shows theactual values (ACTUAL), the generic model forecast (FORECAST-G) and the interpretable modelforecast (FORECAST-I). Columns (b) and (c) show the outputs of stacks 1 and 2 of the generic model,respectively; FORECAST-G is their summation. Columns (d) and (e) show the output of the Trendand the Seasonality stacks of the interpretable model, respectively; FORECAST-I is their summation.
Figure 3: M4 test performance (owa) as a function of ensemble size, based on N-BEATS-G. Thisfigure shows that N-BEATS loses less than 0.5% in terms of owa performance even if 10 timessmaller ensemble size is used.
Figure 4: The architectural configurations used in the ablation study of the doubly residual stack.
Figure 5: The outputs of generic and the interpretable configurations, M4 dataset. Each row is onetime series example per data frequency, top to bottom (Yearly: id Y3974, Quarterly: id Q11588,Monthly: id M19006, Weekly: id W246, Daily: id D404, Hourly: id H344). The magnitudes in a roware normalized by the maximal value of the actual time series for convenience. Column (a) shows theactual values (ACTUAL), the generic model forecast (FORECAST-G) and the interpretable modelforecast (FORECAST-I). Columns (b) and (c) show the outputs of stacks 1 and 2 of the generic model,respectively; FORECAST-G is their summation. Columns (d) and (e) show the output of the Trendand the Seasonality stacks of the interpretable model, respectively; FORECAST-I is their summation.
