Figure 1: With DeFINE, Transformer-XL learns input (embedding) and output (classification) rep-resentations in low n-dimensional space rather than high m-dimensional space, thus reducing pa-rameters significantly while having a minimal impact on the performance.
Figure 2: Learning token representations using different transformation layers with N = 3. (a)Linear Transform (b) Group linear transforms (GLT) (c) HGT (see text for details). Here, N is thetotal number of layers, nl and kl are the input and output dimensions of l-th layer, gl is the numberof groups in l-th layer, and g is the fixed number of groups in group linear transforms.
Figure 3: The DeFINE unit with N = 2 that uses HGT to learn input token representations efficientlyand a direct connection with the input to maximize the flow of information.
Figure 4: Correlation map (m × m) of different embedding layers used in Transformer-XL with n =128 and m = 384 on the WikiText-103. DeFINE is able to approximate the standard embeddingmatrix efficiently. More visualizations are included in Appendix B.
Figure 5: Different ways of stacking transformation layer FG (Sec. A.1) for learning deep tokenrepresentations.
Figure 6: Transformer-XL performance on Wikitext-103 dataset with DeFINE.
Figure 7: Standard embedding matrix approximations using projective embeddings and DeFINE forTransformer-XL at different values of n.
Figure 8: Layer-wise visualization of correlation maps of DeFINE embeddings when n = 64.
Figure 9:	Layer-wise visualization of correlation maps of DeFINE embeddings when n = 12818Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020Map layer in DeFINEExpansion layer 1 in DeFINEReduction layer in DeFINEFigure 10:	Layer-wise visualization of correlation maps of DeFINE embeddings when n = 256Expansion layer 1 in DeFINE with 4 groupsFigure 11: Groups in expansion layers of DeFINE are orthogonal, suggesting these matrices arelearning different representations of their input.
Figure 10:	Layer-wise visualization of correlation maps of DeFINE embeddings when n = 256Expansion layer 1 in DeFINE with 4 groupsFigure 11: Groups in expansion layers of DeFINE are orthogonal, suggesting these matrices arelearning different representations of their input.
Figure 11: Groups in expansion layers of DeFINE are orthogonal, suggesting these matrices arelearning different representations of their input.
