Figure 1: A 3-way relationship between blocks.
Figure 2: The geometry of 1- and 2-simplicial attention. Left: the dot product in terms of the area Ain R2 . Right: the triple product in terms of the volume V in R3 .
Figure 3:	Right: a sample episode of the BoXWorld environment. The rightmost column is the playerinventory, currently empty. Left: graph representation of the puzzle, with key colours as vertices andan arrow C -→ D if key C can be used to obtain key D.
Figure 4:	Right: a sample episode of the bridge BoxWorld environment, in which the Gem has twolocks and there is a marked bridge. Left: graph representation of the puzzle, with upper and lowersolutions paths and the bridge between them. There is a source involving the orange key and a sinkinvolving the purple lock.
Figure 6: Training curve of mean relational and simplicial agents on bridge BoxWorld. Shown arethe mean and standard deviation of four runs of each agent, including the best run of each.
Figure 7: Visualization of 2-simplicial attention in step 18 of an episode.
Figure 8: Training curve of mean relational and simplicial agents on bridge BoxWorld, with time-adjusted x-axis for the simplicial agent.
Figure 9: Training curves for the relational agent on bridge BoxWorld.
Figure 10: Training curves for the simplicial agent on bridge BoxWorld.
Figure 11: Visualisation of I-SimPlicial attention in first Transformer block, between standard en-tities in heads one and two. The vertical axes on the second and third images are the query index0 ≤ i ≤ 39, the horizontal axes are the key index 0 ≤ j ≤ 39.
Figure 12: Visualisation of the 2-simplicial attention in the second Transformer block in step 13 ofan episode of puzzle type (3, 3, 5). Entity 1 is the top lock on the Gem, 15 is associated with theinventory, 36 is the lock directly below the player. Shown is a 2-simplex with target 15.
Figure 13: Visualisation of the 2-simplicial attention in the second Transformer block in step 29 ofan episode of puzzle type (3, 3, 5). Entity 7 is associated with the inventory, 17 is the player. Shownis a 2-simplex with target 17.
Figure 14:	SimPliciaI and relational agent Win rate on puzzle types (1,1,2), (2,2,4).
Figure 15:	Simplicial and relational agent win rate on puzzle types (3,3,5), (3,3,6).
