Figure 1: The performance difference on test datasets, when training on all datasets instead ofILSVRC only. A positive value indicates an improvement from all-dataset training.
Figure 2: The effect of different ways and shots on test performance (w/ 95% confidence intervals)when training on ImageNet.
Figure 3: The effects of pre-training and meta-training (w/ 95% confidence intervals). (ImageNet) or(All datasets) is the training source.
Figure 4: Training examples taken from the various datasets forming Meta-Dataset.
Figure 5: Analysis of performance as a function of the episode’s way, shots for models whosetraining source is (the training data of) all datasets. The bands display 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 6: Accuracy on the test datasets, when training on ILSVRC only or All datasets (same resultsas shown in the main tables). The bars display 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 7: Comparing pre-training to starting from scratch. Same plots as Figure 3a and Figure 3b,only larger.
Figure 8: The performance difference of initializing the embedding weights from a pre-trainedsolution, before episodically training on ImageNet or all datasets, over using a random initializationof those weights. The pre-trained weights that we consider are the ones that the k-NN baselineconverged to when it was trained on ImageNet. Positive values indicate that this pre-training wasbeneficial.
Figure 9: Comparing the meta-trained variant of meta-learners against their inference-only counter-part. Same plots as Figure 3c and Figure 3d, only larger.
Figure 10: The performance difference of meta-learning over the corresponding inference-onlybaseline of each meta-learner. Positive values indicate that meta-learning was beneficial.
Figure 11:	Analysis of performance as a function of the degree of fine-grainedness. Larger heightscorrespond to coarser-grained tasks. The bands display 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 12:	The performance across different ways, with 95% confidence intervals, shown separatelyfor each evaluation dataset. All models had been trained on ImageNet-only.
Figure 13:	The performance across different shots, with 95% confidence intervals, shown separatelyfor each evaluation dataset. All models had been trained on ImageNet-only.
Figure 14:	The performance across different ways, with 95% confidence intervals, shown separatelyfor each evaluation dataset. All models had been trained on (the training splits of) all datasets.
Figure 15:	The performance across different shots, with 95% confidence intervals, shown separatelyfor each evaluation dataset. All models had been trained on (the training splits of) all datasets.
