Figure 1: Three examples of perturbation saliency maps generated from the same model on differentinputs: (a) a frame taken from an episode of agent play in Breakout, (b) the same frame with thebrick pattern reflected across the vertical axis, and (c) the original frame with the ball, paddle andbrick pattern reflected across the vertical axis. The blue and red regions represent their importance inaction selection and reward estimation from the current state, respectively. The pattern and intensityof saliency around the tunnel is not symmetric in either reflection intervention, indicating that apopular hypothesis (agents learn to aim at tunnels) does not hold for all possible tunnels.
Figure 2: (a) Causal graphical model of the relationships between an RL agent (yellow plate) andan image-based environment (blue plate). The environment maintains some (usually latent) gamestate. Some function F produces a high-dimensional pixel representation of game state (“Pixels”).
Figure 3: Interventions on brick configurations in Breakout. (a) saliency after shifting the brickpositions by some pixels where shift=0 represents the original frame; (b) saliency after shifting thebrick positions, ball, and paddle to the left. The pattern and intensity of saliency around the tunnelis not symmetric in the reflection interventions.
Figure 4: Interventions on displayed score in Amidar. The legend in (b) applies to all figures. (a) re-ward over time for different interventions on displayed score; (b) object saliency on displayed scoreover time; (c) correlation between the differences in reward and object saliency from the originaltrajectory. Interventions on displayed score result in differing levels of degraded performance butproduce similar saliency maps, suggesting that agent behavior as measured by rewards is underde-termined by salience.
Figure 5: Interventions on enemy location in Amidar. The legend in (b) applies to all figures. (a)the distance-to-player of each enemy in Amidar, observed over time, where saliency intensity isrepresented by the shaded region around each line; (b) the distance-to-player and saliency, withlinear regressions, observed for each enemy; (c) variation in enemy saliency when enemy positionis varied by intervention. The plots suggest that there is no substantial correlation and no causaldependence between distance-to-player and object saliency.
Figure 6: Examples of (a) perturbation saliency method (Greydanus et al., 2017), (b) object saliencymethod (Iyer et al., 2018), and (c) Jacobian saliency method (Wang et al., 2016), for Amidar.
Figure 7: Causal graphical model for Breakout.
Figure 8: Interventions on displayed score in Amidar (legend in (b) applies to all figures). (a) re-ward over time for different interventions on displayed score; (b) perturbation saliency on displayedscore over time; (c) correlation between the differences in reward and perturbation saliency fromthe original trajectory. Interventions on displayed score result in differing levels of degraded perfor-mance but produce similar saliency maps, suggesting that agent behavior as measured by rewards isunderdetermined by salience.
Figure 9: Interventions on displayed score in Amidar for Jacobian saliency (legend in (b) appliesto all figures). (a) reward over time for different interventions on displayed score; (b) saliency ondisplayed score over time; (c) correlation between the differences in reward and saliency from theoriginal trajectory. Interventions on displayed score result in differing levels of degraded perfor-mance but produce similar saliency maps, suggesting that agent behavior as measured by rewards isunderdetermined by salience.
Figure 10: Interventions on enemy location in Amidar (legend in (b) applies to all figures). (a)the distance-to-player of each enemy in Amidar, observed over time, where saliency intensity isrepresented by the shaded region around each line; (b) the distance-to-player and saliency, withlinear regressions, observed for each enemy; (c) variation in enemy saliency when enemy positionis varied by intervention. The plots suggest that there is no substantial correlation and no causaldependence between distance-to-player and perturbation saliency.
Figure 11: Interventions on enemy location in Amidar (legend in (b) applies to all figures). (a)the distance-to-player of each enemy in Amidar, observed over time, where saliency intensity isrepresented by the shaded region around each line; (b) the distance-to-player and saliency, withlinear regressions, observed for each enemy; (c) variation in enemy saliency when enemy positionis varied by intervention. The plots suggest that there is no substantial correlation and no causaldependence between distance-to-player and Jacobian saliency.
