Figure 1: Complete model-building process. Given a dataset, first a standard NN model is con-structed and trained by a data scientist. The RIO method takes this pretrained model and trainsa GP to estimate the residuals of the NN using both the output of the NN and the original input.
Figure 2: Capturing uncertainty of more and less accurate NNs. These figures illustrate thebehavior of RIO in two cases: (left) The neural network has discovered true complex structure in thelabels, so the residuals have low variance and are easy for the GP to fit with high confidence; (right)The ineffective neural network has introduced unnecessary complexity, so the residuals are modeledwith high uncertainty. In both cases, RIO matches the intuition for how uncertain the NN really is.
Figure 3: Comparison among NN, RIO, and SVGP. The horizontal axis denotes the predictionRMSE of the NN, and the vertical axis the prediction RMSE of RIO (blue dots) and SVGP (yellowdots). Each dot represents an independent experimental run. Since the scales are different, the solidblue line indicates where NN and RIO/SVGP have same prediction RMSE. Thus, a dot below theline means that the method (RIO or SVGP) performs better than the NN, and vice versa. Results ofSVGP on the CT dataset are not plotted because its prediction RMSE exceeded the visible scale (i.e.
Figure 4: Quality of estimated CIs. These figures show the distribution of the percentages thattesting outcomes are within the estimated 95%/90%/68% CIs over all the independent runs.
Figure 5: Quality of estimated CIs. These figures show the distribution of the percentages thattesting outcomes are within the estimated 95%/90%/68% CIs over all the independent runs.
Figure 6: Distribution of CI Coverage. These figures compare the distributions of empiricalcoverage percentages of estimated 1%-99% CIs over all the independent runs for RIO and sVgp.
Figure 7: Distribution of CI Coverage. These figures compare the distributions of empiricalcoverage percentages of estimated 1%-99% CIs over all the independent runs for RIO and sVgp.
Figure 8: Distribution of CI Coverage. These figures compare the distributions of empiricalcoverage percentages of estimated 1%-99% CIs over all the independent runs for RIO and sVgp.
Figure 9: Distribution of Ground Truths and NN/KlO-corrected predictions. The box extendsfrom the lower to upper quartile values of the data points, with a line at the median. The whiskersextend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those past the end of the whiskers,indicating the outliers.
Figure 10: Comparison between NN and RIO-corrected outputs. Each dot represents a datapoint. The horizontal axis denote the original NN predictions, and the vertical axis the correspondingpredictions after RIO corrections. The solid line indicates where NN predictions are same as RIO-corrected predictions (i.e., no change in output). This figure shows that RIO exhibits diverse behaviorin how it calibrates output.
Figure 11:	Distribution of Impovement Ratio. The box extends from the lower to upper quartilevalues of the data (each data point represents an independent experimental run), with a line at themedian. The whiskers extend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those pastthe end of the whiskers, indicating the outliers.
Figure 12:	Distribution of Ground Truths and NN/R+I-corrected predictions. The box extendsfrom the lower to upper quartile values of the data points, with a line at the median. The whiskersextend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those past the end of the whiskers,indicating the outliers.
Figure 13: Comparison between NN and R+I-corrected outputs. Each dot represents a data point.
Figure 14:	Distribution of Impovement Ratio. The box extends from the lower to upper quartilevalues of the data (each data point represents an independent experimental run), with a line at themedian. The whiskers extend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those pastthe end of the whiskers, indicating the outliers.
Figure 15:	Distribution of Ground Truths and NN/R+O-corrected predictions. The box extendsfrom the lower to upper quartile values of the data points, with a line at the median. The whiskersextend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those past the end of the whiskers,indicating the outliers.
Figure 17: Distribution of Impovement Ratio. The box extends from the lower to upper quartilevalues of the data (each data point represents an independent experimental run), with a line at themedian. The whiskers extend from the box to show the range of the data. Flier points are those pastthe end of the whiskers, indicating the outliers.
