Figure 1: A simple illustrative case: fitting a harmonic sound corrupted by GaUSSian noises. Thedetailed setup of all networks can be found in the appendix. (a) The input to networks is a harmonicsound composed by sinusoids of 1,000, 2,000, and 3,000Hz, plus random Gaussian noises. (d) Theclean, target signals. They are shown here as references, not accessible to any models. (b)(c)(e) Bothtemporal and spectral-temporal convolution networks start with a very noisy output at 50 iterations;they then fit the signal as well as the background noises at 200 iterations. At 1,000 iterations, theoutput is similar to the one at 200 iterations. This suggest that these networks fit noises and thetarget signal simultaneously. (f) Harmonic Convolution starts with a noisy output as well, but at 200steps, the network selectively fits the harmonic series instead. Note that the 1,000-step result is evencleaner than the 200-step one.
Figure 2: The frequency statistics for images, spectrograms, and raw waveforms. All magnitudes inthis figure are in log scale. The DC component is not shown in this visualization. (a) Clean imagepatch statistics. The 1/f2 law can be observed as there is an approximately linear energy fallofffrom low frequencies to high frequencies in the log scale. (b) Noisy image patch statistics. (c) Cleanspeech spectrogram statistics. Note that the energy fall-off is different from (a). (d) Noisy speechspectrogram statistics. Note that the energy fall-off along the frequency dimension is different fromthe fall-off along the temporal dimension, a unique phenomenon to this representation. (e) Cleanspeech statistics. The power distribution spreads to higher frequencies. (f) Noisy speech statistics.
Figure 3: Illustrations for regular convolution and Harmonic Convolution. (a) Regular convolutionkernels are supported by a local region. The shape of the support is translational invariant. (b)Harmonic Convolution with an anchoring of 1. This interprets the output frequency as the funda-mental frequency for a harmonic series. (c) With an anchoring of 2, the output frequency is thesecond lower frequency of a harmonic series. (d) Similarly, with an anchoring of 3, the outputlocation is seen as the third harmonics.
Figure 4: Experiments on deep audio priors using Harmonic Convolution, regular convolution, di-lated convolution, and Wave-U-Net. Two PSNR scores are calculated at each iteration: comparingthe output against the input noisy signal (green), and against the ground truth clean signal (red).
