Figure 1: Qualitative Results: Visualization of different target functions (Sec. 2.3). T+ generateshigh reward and T- low reward states; T± generates states in which one action is highly beneficialand another is bad. For a long list of results, with over 50 Atari games, please see the appendix.
Figure 2: Weight Visualization. We visu-alize the weighting (second row) of the re-construction loss from Equation 2 for eightrandomly drawn samples (first row) of thedataset. Most weight lies on the player’s sub-marine and close enemies, supporting theirimportance for the decision making.
Figure 3: Comparison with activation maximiza-tion. The visual features learned by the agents are notcomplex enough to reconstruct typical frames fromthe game via activation maximization (top). Thisproblem is mitigated in our method by learning a low-dimensional embedding of games states (bottom).
Figure 4: Seaquest with ACKTR. The objectiveis T ± for situations that can be rewarding but alsohave a low scoring outcome. The generated statesshow low oxygen or close proximity to enemies.
Figure 5: Driving simulator. Input frame sample on the left and then two target function visualizationsobtained by our method. For each objective we show three random samples. For simplicity we only show thefirst frame of segmentation instead of the whole state (8 frames).
Figure 6: Driving simulator. Samples for theT - objective of an agent trained in the rea-sonable pedestrians environment. From thesesamples one can infer that the agent is awareof traffic lights (red) and other cars (blue) buthas very likely not understood the severityof hitting pedestrians (yellow). Deployingthis agent in the distracted pedestrians envi-ronment shows that the agent indeed collideswith people that cross the road in front of theagent.
Figure 7: Generating novel states. We show aframe generated by our method under the T ± ob-jective and retrieve the closest frame from the train-ing set using L2 distance and the objective func-tion. Both frames are very different, showing thatthe method is able to generate novel states. For aquantitative evaluation, please see Tab. 2.
Figure 8: Objective Score Distribution. We compare the distribution of values of different targetfunctions (T - (a), T+ (b) and T ± (c)) between states from the validation set and those generatedby our method. It is clear that the distribution of critical states differs and partially lies outside themaximum values of the val-set. This means these states are novel states, with higher criticalness-score.
Figure 9: Air Raid. Target function: S+ .
Figure 10: Alien. Target function: right.
Figure 11: Amidar. Target function: up.
Figure 12: Assault. Target function: S - .
Figure 13: Asterix. Target function: T-.
Figure 14: Asteroids. Target function: up-fire.
Figure 15: Atlantis. Target function: T+ .
Figure 16: Bank Heist. Target function: T+ .
Figure 17: Battlezone. Target function: T-.
Figure 18: Beamrider. Target function: T+ .
Figure 19: Berzerk. Target function: S+ .
Figure 20: Bowling. Target function: S+ .
Figure 21: Boxing. Target function: S+ .
Figure 22: Breakout. Target function: T-.
Figure 23: Breakout. Target function: Left.
Figure 24: Carnival. Target function: right.
Figure 25: Centipede. Target function: T±.
Figure 26: Chopper Command. Target function: S+ .
Figure 27: Crazy Climber. Target function: T-.
Figure 28: Demon Attack. Target function: T + .
Figure 29: Elevator Action. Target function: no-op.
Figure 30: Enduro. Target function: S+ .
Figure 31: Freeway. Target function: T+.
Figure 32: Frostbite. Target function: no-op.
Figure 33: Gopher. Target function: S-.
Figure 36: JamesBond. Target function: S+.
Figure 37: Kangaroo. Target function: S-.
Figure 38: Krull. Target function: fire.
Figure 39: Kung Fu Master. Target function: up.
Figure 40: Montezuma’s Revenge. Target function: T-.
Figure 41: Ms. Pacman. Target function: no-op.
Figure 42: Name This Game. Target function: T ± .
Figure 43: Phoenix. Target function: T ± .
Figure 44: Pong. Target function: no-op.
Figure 45: Pooyan. Target function: S - .
Figure 46: Q-Bert. Target function: left.
Figure 47: River Raid. Target function: T + .
Figure 48: Space Invaders. Target function: left.
Figure 49: Star Gunner. Target function: T ± .
Figure 50: Tutankham. Target function: no-op.
Figure 51: Venture. Target function: S+ .
Figure 52: Video Pinball. Target function: T-.
Figure 53: Wizard Of Wor. Target function: left.
