Figure 1: Composing complex skills using multiple agents’ primitive skills requires proper coordina-tion between agents since concurrent execution of primitive skills requires temporal and behavioralcoordination. For example, to move a block into a container on the other end of the table, the agentneeds to not only utilize pick, place, and push primitive skills at the right time but also select theappropriate behaviors for these skills, represented as latent vectors z1, z2, z3, and z4 above. Naivemethods neglecting either temporal or behavioral coordination will produce unintended behaviors,such as collisions between end-effectors.
Figure 2: Our method is composed of two components: a meta policy and a set of agent-specificprimitive policies relevant to task completion. The meta policy selects which primitive skill to run foreach agent as well as the behavior embedding (i.e. variation in behavior) of the chosen primitive skill.
Figure 3: Different multi-agent architectures. (a) The vanilla RL method considers all agents as amonolithic agent; thus a single policy takes the full observation as input and outputs the full action.
Figure 4: The composite tasks pose a challenging combination of object manipulation and locomotionskills, which requires coordination of multiple agents and temporally extended behaviors. (a) Theleft Jaco arm needs to pick up a block while the right Jaco arm pushes a container, and then it placesthe block into the container. (b) Two Jaco arms are required to pick and place a bar-shaped blocktogether. (c) Two ants push the red box to the goal location (green circle) together.
Figure 5: Success rates of our method (Modular-SBD) and baselines. For modular frameworks(Modular and Modular-SBD), we shift the learning curves rightwards the total number of environmentsteps the agent takes to learn the primitive skills (0.9 M, 1.2 M, and 2.0 M, respectively). Our methodsubstantially improves learning speed and performance on Jaco Pick-Push-Place and Ant Push.
Figure 6: Learning curves of our method withdifferent diversity coefficients λ2 on ANT PUSH.
Figure 7: Success rates of our method with dif-ferent Tlow coefficients on Jaco environments.
