Figure 1: Median train loss across 100 runs versus epochs for sine wave regression tasks withdifferent frequency values. The shaded areas represent the 25th and 75th percentiles. See Section F.1in the appendix for an evaluation of the test performance.
Figure 2: Comparison of homotopy method, warm start and random initialization on sine waveregression tasks. The shaded areas represent the 25th and 75th percentiles. On the left, the mediantrain loss achieved by the considered methods after 2500 epochs across 100 runs versus differentomega values for the target task is plotted. For the homotopy method and warm-start initialization,ωs = 1 rad is used. On the right, the median train loss across 100 runs versus epochs for target taskwith ω = 137 rad is plotted. With respect to Figure 1b, in Figure 2b a cosine decay schedule is usedfor the learning rate, and more epochs are performed to better observe the convergence properties ofthe different methods.
Figure 3: Median train loss across 10 runs versus epochs for different target task distributions. Inboth cases, the source task is the classification of the MNIST dataset. See Section F.2 in the appendixfor an evaluation of the test performance.
Figure 4: Two different homotopy deformations between the probability density functions of twoone-dimensional Gaussian distributions with mean and standard deviation given by μι = 1, σι = 1and μ2 = 5, σ2 = 0.1, respectively. The homotopy represented in Figure 4a results in a mixture ofGaussian distributions, with mixture coefficient given by the homotopy parameter λ. In Figure 4bthe deformation concerns instead the parameters μ and σ of the original distributions. Preservingunimodality is a desirable property when the homotopy function is used in combination with acontinuation method since, as shown in Figure 4b, the location of the optimum moves together withthe function deformation, allowing the optimizer to track it and gradually reach the optimum of thefinal target task. On the contrary, deforming the function as shown in Figure 4a does not lead toa gradual shift of the optimal solutions. Consequently, approximately and sequentially solving theproblems corresponding to intermediate values of the homotopy parameter λ, i.e. 0 < λ < 1, willnot allow the homotopy method to gradually approach the desired final optimal solution.
Figure 5: Graphical representations of the source (left) and target with ω = 137 rad (right) datadistributions used for the sine-wave regression evaluation.
Figure 7: Median train loss across 100 runs versus epochs for sine wave regression tasks withdifferent omega values.
Figure 6: Graphical representation of the proposed homotopy transformation for the supervisedregression scenario when applied to progressively deform a sine wave function with frequency of1 radian into a sine wave function with frequency of 137 radians for different values of homotopyparameter.
Figure 8: Graphical representation of the homotopy transformation from xs to xt as described inEquation (19) for two sampled images from the MNIST and FashionMNIST datasets.
Figure 9: Graphical representation of the results derived in Proposition 4.11. The continuous anddashed lines are used to represent the circles of radius B and B - δe around the optimal solutions,respectively.
Figure 10: Median test loss across 100 runs versus epochs for target tasks with different ω values.
