Figure 1: Loss and error rate on the path connecting two untampered VGG models trained onCIFAR-10. The path connection is trained using different settings as indicated by the curve colors.
Figure 2: Error rate against backdoor attacks on the connection path for CIFAR-10 (VGG). The errorrate of clean/backdoored samples means the standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure 3: Error rate against error-injection attack on the connection path for CIFAR-10 (VGG). Theerror rate of clean/targeted samples means standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure 4: Loss, error rate, attack success rate and largest eigenvalue of input Hessian on the path con-necting different model pairs on CIFAR-10 (VGG) using standard loss. The error rate of training/testdata means standard training/test error, respectively. In all cases, there is no standard loss barrier buta robustness loss barrier. There is also a high correlation between the robustness loss and the largesteigenvalue of input Hessian, and their Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) is reported in the title.
Figure A1: Loss and error rate on the path connecting two untampered ResNet models trained onSVHN. The path connection is trained using different settings as indicated by the curve colors. Theinference results on test set are evaluated using 5000 samples, which are separate from what are usedfor path connection.
Figure A2: Examples of backdoored images on CIFAR-10 and SVHN. The triggers are white blockslocated at the right-bottom area of each image.
Figure A4: Error rate of single-target backdoor attack on the connection path for CIFAR-10. Theerror rate of clean/backdoored samples means standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure A5: Error rate of single-target backdoor attack on the connection path for SVHN. The errorrate of clean/backdoored samples means standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure A6: Error rate against error-injection attack on the connection path for CIFAR-10 (VGG). Theerror rate of clean/targeted samples means standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure A7: Error rate under backdoor attack on path connection for CIFAR-10 (VGG). The error rateof clean/triggered samples means the standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure A8: Error rate against error-injection attack on the connection path for CIFAR-10 (VGG). Theerror rate of clean/targeted samples means standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
Figure A9: Error rate against backdoor attack on the connection path for CIFAR-10 (VGG). Theerror rate of clean/triggered samples means the standard-test-error/attack-failure-rate, respectively.
