Table 1: Sentences generated from a baseline text-VAE model, as described in (Bowman et al., 2016).
Table 3: Samples randomly generated from hier-VAE-D and flat-VAE, which are both trained on the Yelpreview dataset. The repetitive patterns within the generated reviews are highlighted. More examples can befound in the supplementary material (Table 14).
Table 5: Evaluation results for generated sequences by our models and baselines on corpus-level BLEU scores.
Table 6: The self-BLEU scores, unique n-gram percentages and 2-gram entropy score of 1000 generatedsentences. Models are trained on the Yelp Reviews dataset to evaluate the diversity of generated samples.
Table 4: With a trained hier-VAE-D model on the Yelp Re-view dataset, intermediate sentences are produced from lin-ear transition between two points in the latent space.
Table 7:	Generated samples from hier-VAE-D (trained on the arXiv abstract dataset).
Table 8:	Sentiment transfer results with attribute vector arithmetic. More samples can be found in the supple-mentary material (Table 16).
Table 9: A Mechanical Turk blind heads-upevaluation between pairs of models trained onthe Yelp Reviews dataset. From columns 2-5: Grammaticality(G), Consistency (C), Non-Redundancy(N), Overall (O).
Table 10: Conditionally generated paper abstracts based upon a title (trained with the arXiv data).
Table 13: Summary statistics for the datasets used in the generic text generation experiments.
Table 14: Samples randomly generated from hier-VAE-D and flat-VAE, which are both trained onthe Yelp review dataset. The repetitive patterns within the generated reviews are highlighted.
Table 15: Using the hier-VAE-D model trained on the Yelp Review dataset, intermediate sentencesare produced from linear transition between two points (A and B) in the prior latent space. Eachsentence in the left panel is generated from a latent point on a linear path, and each sentence on theright is the closet sample to the left one within the entire training set (determined by BLEU-2 score).
Table 16: Sentiment transfer results with attribute vector arithmetic.
