Table 1: Target Functions. The monitored functions in the TensorFlow framework (v1.9.0-rc0).
Table 2: Observed Architecture Attributes of VGG19 and ResNet50. We consider the 8 attributesextracted from short and long attacks. In the short attacks, We report the average values observed inten random queries whereas the long attacks include the averages of ten continuous queries.
Table 3: Reconstruction Process of ResNet50 Architecture. We list the computation sequencescaptured by our attack in the above rows and the reconstruction process at the bottom rows. Theerrors in capturing the correct computation sequences by our attacker are marked as bold and red.
Table 4: Fingerprinting Performance and Important Attributes. Each row corresponds to eachtask. We list the accuracy of the best classifiers and the essential attributes based on the MI scores,denoted by the numbers in brackets.
Table 5: Effectiveness of the Decoy Process. We compare the 8 attributes extracted from 10 runs,average errors, and average time with and without TinyNets. Note that C refers to the number ofconvolutional layers, R refers to the number of relu activation layers, and M refers to the number ofmerge layers.
Table 6: Extracted architecture attributes with Obfuscated ResNet50. We obfuscated the first 3blocks (i.e., Residual, Identity, and Identity blocks) of the ResNet50 architecture.
Table 7: Reconstruction Process of VGG16 Architecture. We list the computation sequencescaptured by our attack above and the reconstruction process at the bottom.
Table 8: The scores of 8 attributes in each principal axis. The first axis (PCA-0) is influenced by#convs > #relus > #merges, and the second axis (PCA-1) varies with #merges > #convs > #relus.
Table 9: Extracted architecture attributes of the 11 networks. We consider the 8 attributesextracted from short and long attacks. In the short attacks, we report the average values observed inten random queries, whereas in the long attacks, we report the averages of ten continuous queries.
