Table 1: Statistics of the different data sources. Hospital P is a public data set (PhysioNet). Addi-tional details about hospital 0/1 data in Figures 5, 6, and 7 in Appendix: Section 6.1The hospital 0/1 data includes static information (height, weight, age, sex, procedure codes), aswell as real-time measurements of thirty-five physiological signals (e.g., SaO2, FiO2, ETCO2, etc.)sampled minute by minute. Although the hospital P data contains several physiological signalssampled at a high frequency, we solely use a minute by minute SaO2 signal for our experiments.
Table 2: Notation for different embeddings. Special notation includes: Minh1→h2 and Hypoxh1→h2means that the best model trained on hospital h1 data is trained on h2 data until convergence.
Table 3: Sample sizes for the Min and Auto predictions for training the LSTM autoencoders. For theautoencoders we utilize the same data, without looking at the labels. We only utilize the 15 featuresabove the line in both hospitals (Figure 5) for training our models.
Table 4: Sample sizes for the final downstream predictions.
Table 5: Base rates of different predictions in the test sets.
Table 6: Sample sizes for hospital P. We don’t use hospital P for a test set, so we only have trainingand validation sets. The base rate of hypoxemia on the validation set is 1.95%.
Table 7: Hospital 0 p-values for Figure 2. Reporting adjusted p-values based on one hundred boot-straps of the test set with adjusted pairwise comparisons via ANOVA with Tukey’s HSD test. 0.0denotes a p-value less than 1e-14. Since we are most concerned with models 10, 12, and 14 weonly report pairs that include these models for the sake of brevity.
Table 8: Hospital 1 p-values for Figure 2. Reporting adjusted p-values based on one hundred boot-straps of the test set with adjusted pairwise comparisons via ANOVA with Tukey’s HSD test. 0.0denotes a p-value less than 1e-14. Since we are most concerned with models 10, 12, and 14 weonly report pairs that include these models for the sake of brevity.
Table 9: Hospital 0 P-Valuesfor Figure 3. Reporting adjusted p-values based on one hundred boot-straps of the test set with adjusted pairwise comparisons via ANOVA with Tukey's HSD test.
Table 10: Hospital 1 p-values for Figure 3. Reporting adjusted p-values based on one hundredbootstraps of the test set with adjusted pairwise comparisons via ANOVA with Tukey’s HSD test.
