Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Towards Metamerism via Foveated Style Transfer
Arturo Deza1,4, Aditya Jonnalagadda3, Miguel P. Eckstein1,2,4
1 Dynamical Neuroscience, 2Psychological and Brain Sciences,
3Electric and Computer Engineering, 4 Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
UC Santa Barbara, CA, USA
deza@dyns.ucsb.edu,aditya_jonnalagada@ece.ucsb.edu,eckstein@psych.ucsb.edu
Abstract
The problem of visual metamerism is defined as finding a family of perceptually
indistinguishable, yet physically different images. In this paper, we propose our
NeuroFovea metamer model, a foveated generative model that is based on a mixture
of peripheral representations and style transfer forward-pass algorithms. Our
gradient-descent free model is parametrized by a foveated VGG19 encoder-decoder
which allows us to encode images in high dimensional space and interpolate
between the content and texture information with adaptive instance normalization
anywhere in the visual field. Our contributions include: 1) A framework for
computing metamers that resembles a noisy communication system via a foveated
feed-forward encoder-decoder network - We observe that metamerism arises as a
byproduct of noisy perturbations that partially lie in the perceptual null space; 2)
A perceptual optimization scheme as a solution to the hyperparametric nature of
our metamer model that requires tuning of the image-texture tradeoff coefficients
everywhere in the visual field which are a consequence of internal noise; 3) An
ABX psychophysical evaluation of our metamers where we also find that the rate
of growth of the receptive fields in our model match V1 for reference metamers and
V2 between synthesized samples. Our model also renders metamers at roughly a
second, presenting a ×1000 speed-up compared to the previous work, which allows
for tractable data-driven metamer experiments.
1	Introduction
The history of metamers originally started through color matching theory, where two light sources
were used to match a test light’s wavelength, until both light sources are indistinguishable from each
other producing what is called a color metamer. This leads to the definition of visual metamerism:
when two physically different stimuli produce the same perceptual response (See Figure 1 for an
example). Motivated by Balas et al. (2009)’s work of local texture matching in the periphery as a
mechanism that explains visual crowding, Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) were the first to create such
point-of-fixation driven metamers through such local texture matching models that tile the entire
visual field given log-polar pooling regions that simulate the V1 and V2 receptive field sizes, as well
as having global image statistics that match the metamer with the original image. The essence of
their algorithm is to use gradient descent to match the local texture (Portilla & Simoncelli (2000))
and image statistics of the original image throughout the visual field given a point of fixation until
convergence thus producing two images that are perceptually indistinguishable to each other.
However, metamerism research currently faces 2 main limitations: The first is that metamer rendering
faces no unique solution. Consider the potentially trivial examples of having an image I and its
metamer M where all pixel values are identical except for one which is set to zero (making this
difference unnoticeable), or the case where the metameric response arises from an imperceptible equal
perturbation across all pixels as suggested in Johnson et al. (2016); Freeman & Simoncelli (2011).
This is a concept similar to Just Noticeable Differences (Lubin (1997); Daly (1992)). However, like
the work of Freeman & Simoncelli (2011); Keshvari & Rosenholtz (2016); Rosenholtz et al. (2012);
Balas et al. (2009), we are interested in creating point-of-fixation driven metamers, which create
images that preserve information in the fovea, yet lose spatial information in the periphery such that
this loss is unnoticeable contingent of a point of fixation (Figure 1). The second issue is that the
current state of the art for a full field of view rendering of a 512px × 512px metamer takes 6 hours for
a grayscale image and roughly a day for a color image. This computational constraint makes data-
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Image
Metamer
Figure 1: Two visual metamers are physically different images that when fixated on the orange dot
(center), should remain perceptually indistinguishable to each other for an observer. Colored circles
highlight different distortions in the visual field that observers do not perceive in our model.
driven experiments intractable if they require thousands of metamers. From a practical perspective,
creating metamers that are quick to compute may lead to computational efficiency in rendering of
VR foveated displays and creation of novel neuroscience experiments that require metameric stimuli
such as gaze-contingent displays, or metameric videos for fMRI, EEG, or Eye-Tracking.
We think there is a way to capitalize metamer understanding and rendering given the developments
made in the field of style transfer. We know that the original model of Freeman & Simoncelli (2011)
consists of a local texture matching procedure for multiple pooling regions in the visual field as well
as global image content matching. If we can find a way to perform localized style transfer with
proper texture statistics for all the pooling regions in the visual field, and if the metamerism via
texture-matching hypothesis is correct - We can in theory successfully render a metamer.
Within the context of style transfer, we would want a complete and flexible framework where a
single netWork can encode any style (or texture) Without the need to re-train, and With the poWer of
producing style transfer With a single forWard pass, thus enabling real-time applications. Furthermore,
We Would Want such frameWork to also control for spatial and scale factors (Gatys et al. (2017)) to
enable foveated pooling (Akbas & Eckstein (2017); Deza & Eckstein (2016)) Which is critical in
metamer rendering. The very recent Work of Huang & Belongie (2017), provides such frameWork
through adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN), Where the content image is stylized by adjusting
the mean and standard deviation of the channel activations of the encoded representation to match
With the style. They achieve results that rival those of Ulyanov et al. (2016); Johnson et al. (2016),
With the added benefit of not being limited to a single texture in a feed-forWard pipeline.
In our model: We stack a peripheral architecture on top of a VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman (2015))
in its encoded feature space, to map an image into a perceptual space. We then add internal noise in
the encoded space of our model as a characterization that perceptual systems are noisy. We find that
inverting such modified image representation via a decoder results in a metamer. This breaks doWn
our model into a foveated feed-forWard ‘auto’ style transfer netWork, Where the input image plays the
role both of the content and the style, and internal netWork noise (stylized With the content statistics)
serves as a proxy for intrinsic image texture. While our model uses AdaIN for style transfer and a
VGGNet for texture statistics, our pipeline is extendible to other models that successfully execute
style transfer and capture proper texture statistics (Ustyuzhaninov et al. (2017)).
2	Design of the NeuroFovea model
To construct our metamer We propose the folloWing statement: A metamer M can be rendered by
transferring k localized styles over a content image I, controlled by a set of style-to-content ratios αi
for every pooling region (i-th receptive field). More formally, our goal is to find a Metamer function
M(O) : I → M, where an input image I ∈ RL is fed through a VGG-Net encoder E(∙) : RL → RD
Which is both the content and the style image, to produce the content feature C ∈ RD , Where C = E(I)
as shown in Figure 2. Let L = C×H× W, and D = C0 ×H0 × W0 where {C, C0}, {H, H0}, {W, W0} are
the image/layer channels, height, width given the convolutional structure of the encoder (we drop
fully connected layers). A noise patch colored via ZCA (Bell & Sejnowski (1995)) to match the
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 2: The NeuroFovea metamer generation schematic: An input image and a noise patch are
fed through a VGG-Net encoder into a new feature space. Through spatial control we can produce
an interpolation for each pooling region in such feature space between the stylized-noise (texture),
and the content (the input image). This is how we successfully impose both global image and
local texture-like constraints in every pooling region. The metamer is the output of the pooled (and
interpolated) feature vector through the Meta VGG-Net Decoder.
content image's mean and variance N 〜(μι,σ2) ∈ RL is also fed through the same VGG-Net encoder
producing the noise feature N ∈ RD, where N = E(N). This is the internal perceptual noise of the
system which will later on serve us as a proxy for texture encoding. These vectors are masked through
spatial control a la GatyS et al. (2017), and the noise is stylized via S(∙): RD → RD with the content
which encodes the texture representation of the content in the feature space through Adaptive Instance
Normalization (AdaIN). A target feature Ti ∈ RD is defined as an interpolation between the stylized
noise S(Ni) and the content Ci modulated by α, in the feature space RD for every i-th pooling region:
Ti(I |N; α) = (1 - α)G(I) + αS(N i)	(1)
In other words, in our quest to probe for metamerism, we are finding an intermediate representation
(the convex combination) between two vectors representing the image and its texturized version (the
stylized noise) in RD per pooling region as seen in Figure 3. Within the framework of style transfer,
we could think of this as a content-vs-style or structure-vs-texture tradeoff, since the style and the
content image are the same. Similar interpolations have been explored in Henaff & Simoncelli (2016)
via a joint pixel and network space minimization. The final target feature vector T is the masked
sum of every Ti with spatial control masks wi s.t. T = PwiTi. The metamer is the output of the
Meta VGG-Net decoder D(∙) on T, where the decoder receives only one vector (T) and produces
a global decoded output. Our Meta VGG-Net Decoder compensates for small artifacts by stacking
a pix2pix Isola et al. (2017) U-Net refinement module which was trained on the Encoder-Decoder
outputs to map to the original high resolution image. Figure 2 fully describes our model, and the
metamer transform is computed via:
k
M( I IN; α) = D(EP( I |N； α)) = D(2 Wi [(1 - a i∙ )E i∙ (I) + α 似 Ei(N))D	(2)
i=1
where EP is the foveated encoder that is defined as the sum of encoder outputs over all the k pooling
regions (our spatial controls masks wi) in the visual field. Note that the decoder was not trained
to generate metamers, but rather to invert the encoded image and act as E-1. It happens to be the
ɑ = 0.0 α = 0.2 α = 0.4 a = 0.6 a = 0.8 α = 1.0
Figure 3: Interpolating between an image’s intrinsic content and texture via a convex combination in
the output of the VGG19 Encoder E. Here we are treating the patch as a single pooling region. In our
model, this interpolation given Eq. 1 is done for every pooling region in the visual field.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
case that perturbing the encoded representation in the direction of the stylized noise by an amount
specified by the size of the pooling regions, outputs a metamer. Additional specifications and training
of our model can be seen in the Supplementary Material.
2.1	Model Interpretability
Within the framework of metamerism where distortions lie on the perceptual null space as proposed
initially in color matching theory, and also in Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) for images, we can think
of our model as a direct transform that is maximizing how much information to discard depending on
the texture-like properties of the image and the size of the receptive fields. Consider the following: if
our interpolation is projected from the encoded space to the perceptual space via P, from Eq. 1 we
get PTi = P(1 - α)Ci (I) + P(α)S(Ni), it follows that for each receptive field:
P Ti = P Ci +P α(S⊥(Ni) + Sk(Ni))
|{z}	|{z}	| {z	}
metamer	image	distortion
(3)
by decomposing S(Ni) - Ci = S⊥(Ni) +Sk(Ni), where Sk is the projection of the difference vector on
the perceptual space, and S⊥(Ni) is the orthogonal component perpendicular to such vector which lies
in the perceptual null space (PS⊥ (Ni) = ~0). The value of these components will change depending
on the location of Ci and S(Ni), and the geometry of the encoded space. If ||Sk(Ni)||22 < , (i.e. the
image patch has strong texture-like properties), then α can vary above its critical value given that
S⊥(Ni) is in the null space of P and the distortion term will still be small; but if ||Sk(Ni)||22 > ,
α can not exceed its critical value for the metamerism condition to hold (PTi ≈ PCi). Thus our
interest is in computing the maximal average amount of distortion (driven by α) given human
sensitivity before observers can tell the difference. This is illustrated in Figure 4 via the blue
circle around Ci in the perceptual space which shows the metameric boundary for any distortion.
One can also see the resemblance of the model to a noisy com-
munication system in the context of information theory. The
information source is the image I, the transmitter and the re-
ceiver are the encoder and decoders (E, D) respectively, and the
noise source is the encoded noise patch E(N) imposing texture
distortions in the visual field, and the destination is the metamer
M. Highlighting this equivalence is important as metamerism
can also be explored within the context of image compression
and rate-distortion theory as in Balle et al. (2017). Such ap-
proaches are beyond the scope of this paper, however they
are worth exploring in future work as most metamer models
purely involve texture and image analysis-synthesis matching
paradigms that are gradient-descent based.
Perceptual Space
3	Hyperparameteric nature of our model
Similar to our model, the Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) model Figure 4: Perceptual Projection.
(hereto be abbreviated FS) requires a scale parameter s which
controls the rate of growth of the receptive fields as a function of eccentricity. This parameter should
be maximized such that an upperbound for perceptual discrimination is found. Given that texture
and image matching occurs in each one of the pooling regions: a high scaling factor will likely make
the image rapidly distinguishable from the original as distortions are more apparent in the periphery.
Conversely, a low scaling factor might gaurantee metamerism even if the texture statistics are not fully
correct given that smaller pooling regions will simulate weak effects of crowding. Low scaling factors
in that sense are potentially uninteresting - it is the value up until humans can tell the difference
that is critical (Lubin (1997)). FS set out to find such critical value via a psychophysical experiment
where they perform the following single-variable optimization to find such upper bound:
So = argmax E[d0(s∣θobs)]
s
(4)
s	.t. 0 < d0(s∣θobs) < G where d0 = Φ-1(HR) - Φ-1(FA) is the index of detectability for each observer
θobs , Φ is the cumulative of the gaussian distribution, and HR and FA are the hit rate and false alarm
rates as defined in Green & Swets (1966). However, our model is different in regards to a set of
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
s = 0.25
s=0.50	s=0.75	s=1.0
Figure 5: Potential issues of psychophysical intractability for the joint estimation of (S) and γ(∙) as
described by our model. Running a psychophysical experiment that runs an exhaustive search for
upper bounds for the scale and distortion parameters for every receptive field is intractable. The goal
of Experiment 1 is to solve this intractabitilty posed formally in Eq. 6 via a simulated experiment.
hyperparameters α that We must estimate everywhere in the visual field as summarized by the Y
function, where we assume α to be tangentially isotropic:
α = γ(o; s)	(5)
where each α represents the maximum amount of distortion (Eq. 1) that is allowed for every receptive
field in the visual periphery before an observer will notice. At a first glance, it is not trivial to know if
α should be a function of scale, retinal eccentricity, receptive field size, image content or potentially a
combination of the before-mentioned (hence the ◦ in the γ function’s argument).
Thus, the motivation of α seems uncertain and perhaps un-necessary from the Occam’s razor per-
spective of model simplicity. This raises the question: Why does the FS model not require any
additional hyperparameters, requiring only a single scale (s) parameter? The answer lies in the nature
of their model which is gradient descent based and where local texture statistics are matched for every
pooling region in the visual field, while preserving global image structural information. When such
condition is reached, no further synthesis steps are required as it is an equilibrium point. Indeed, the
experiments of Wallis et al. (2016) have shown that images do not remain metameric if the structural
information of a pooling region is discarded while purely retaining the texture statistics of Portilla
& Simoncelli (2000). This motivates the purpose of α where we interpolate between structural and
texture representation. Thus our goal is to find that equilibirum point in one-shot, given that our
model is purely feed-forward and requires no gradient-descent (Eq. 2). At the expense of this artifice,
we run into the challenge of facing a multi-variable optimization problem that has the risk of being
psychophysically intractable. Analogous to FS, we must solve:
so,O) = argmax E[d0(S,<α∣θobs)]	(6)
S ,α
s.t. 0 < d0(S,α∣θobs) < e. Figure 5 shows the potential intractability: each observer would have to
run multiple rounds of an ABX experiment for a collection of many scales and α values for each
location in the visual field. Consider: (S scales) × (k pooling regions) × (αm step size for each α) ×
(N images) × (w trials): S kNαmw trials per observer.
We will show in Experiment 1 that one solution to Eq. 6 is to find a relationship between each set of
a's and the scale, expressed via the Y function. This requires a two stage process: 1) Showing that
such γ exists; 2) Estimate γ given s. If this is achieved, we can relax the multi-variable optimization
into a single variable optimization problem, where 0 < d0(S, γ(o; S)∣θobs) < e, and:
so = argmax E[d0(S,γ(o; S)∣θobs)]	(7)
S
4	Experiments
The goal of Experiment 1 is to estimate Y as a function of S via a computational simulation as a proxy
for running human psychophysics. Once it is computed, we have reduced our minimization to a
tractable single variable optimization problem. We will then proceed to Experiment 2 where we will
perform an ABX experiment on human observers by varying the scale to render visual metamers as
originally proposed by FS. We will use the images shown in Figure 6 for both our experiments.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 6: A color-coded collection of images used in our experiments.
4.1	Experiment 1: Estimation of model hyperparameters via perceptual optimization
Existence and shape of γ: Given some biological priors, we would like γ to satisfy these properties:
1.	γ : Z → α s.t. Z ∈ [0, ∞), α ⊂ [0, 1), where z ∈ Z is parametrized by the size (radius) of each
receptive field (pooling region) which grows with eccentricity in humans.
2.	γ is continuous and monotonically non-decreasing since more information should not be
gained given larger crowding effects as receptive field size increases in the periphery.
3.	γ has a unique zero at γ(0) = 0. Under ideal assumptions there is no loss of information in
the fovea, where the size of the receptive fields asymptotes to zero.
Indeed, we found that γ is sigmoidal, and is a function of z, parametrized by s:
b
2
γ(z; s) = a +
c+exp(-dz)
-1 +
1 + exp(-d(s)z)
(8)
Estimation of γ: To numerically estimate the
amount of α-noise distortion for each receptive
field in our metamer model we need to find a
way to simulate the perceptual loss made by a
human observer when trying to discriminate be-
tween metamers and original images. We will
define a perceptual loss L that has the goal of
matching the distortions via SSIM of a gradient
descent based method such as the FS metamers,
and the NeuroFovea metamers (NF) with their
reference images - a strategy similar to Laparra
et al. (2017) used for perceptual rendering. We
chose SSIM as it is a standard IQA metric that
is monotonic with human judgements, although
other metrics such as MS-SSIM and IW-SSIM
show similar tuning properties for γ as shown
in the Supplementary Material. Indeed the refer-
ence image I0 for the NF metamer is limited by
the autoencoder-like nature of the model where
the bottleneck usually limits perfect reconstruc-
tion s.t. I = D(E(I))∣(α=0), where I → I, and
they are only equal if the encoder-decoder pair
for every pooling region in the visual field
Figure 7: Perceptual optimization.
(E, D) allows for lossless compression. Since we can not define a direct loss function L between the
metamers, we will need their reference images to define a convex surrogate loss function LR . The
goal of this function should be to match the perceptual loss of both metamers for each receptive field
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
S
1st Eccentricity R.F.
MNF
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
2nd Eccentricity R.F. 3rd Eccentricity R.F. 4th Eccentricity R.F.
.2 .2 .1 .1 .0
Ooooo
Z(WISS,v)&
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0
α-Noise Distortion
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0
α-Noise Distortion
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0
α-Noise Distortion
Figure 8: The result of each SSIM (top) for Experiment 1 for a scale of s = 0.3 where we find
the critical α for each receptive field ring as we minimize E(∆-SSIM)2 (bottom). E(∆-SSIM)2 is
minimized by matching the perceptual distortion of the Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) (MFS) and
NeuroFovea (MNF) metamers in Eq. 9. Each color represents a different 512 × 512 image trajectory,
the black line (bottom) shows the average. Only the first 4 eccentricity dependent receptive fields are
shown.
0.0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0
α-Noise Distortion
k when compared to their reference images: the original image I for the FS model, and the decoded
image I0 for the NF model:
1N
LR (α∣k) = E(∆-SSIM)2 = n>(SSIM( MFS), I (j, k)) - SSIM( MN F(Y)Fjj k )))2	(9)
N j=1
and ai should be minimized for each k pooling region via: α0 = argmina LR (α∣ k) for the collection
of N images. The intuition behind this procedure is shown in Figure 7. Note that if I 0= I, i.e. there is
perfect lossless compression and reconstruction given the choice of encoder and decoder, then the
optimization is performed with reference to the same original image. This is an important observation
as the reconstruction capacity of our decoder is limited despite E(MS-SSIM(I, I 0) = 0.86 ± 0.04. Only
using the original image in the optimization yields poor local minima at α = 0. Despite such limitation,
we show that reference metamers can still be achieved for our lossy compression model.
Results: A collection of 10 images were used in our experiments. We then computed the SSIM
score for each FS and NF image paired with their reference image across each receptive field (R.F.)
and averaged those that belonged to the same retinal eccentricity. Figure 8 (top) shows these results,
as well as the convex nature of the loss function displayed in the bottom. This procedure was
repeated for all the eccentricity-dependent receptive fields for a collection of 5 values of scale:
{0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7}. A sigmoid to estimate γ was then fitted to each α per R.F. parametrized by
scale via least squares. This gave us a collection of d values that control the slope rate of the sigmoid
(Eq. 8). These were d : {1.240, 1.196, 1.363, 1.311, 1.355} respectively per scale, and {d} = 1.281 for
the ensemble of all scales. We then conducted a 10000 sample permutation test between the pair
of (zs, αs) points per scale and the ensemble of points across all scales ({z}, {α}) that verified that
their variation is statistically non-significant (p ≥ 0.05). Figure 9 illustrates the results from such
procedure. We can conclude that the parameters ofγ do not vary as we vary scale. In other words,
the α = γ(z) function is fixed, and the scale parameter itself which controls receptive field size will
implicitly modulate the maximum α-noise distortion with a unique γ function. If the scale factor is
small, the maximum noise distortion in the far periphery will be small and vice versa if the scale is
large. We should point out that Figure 9 might suggest that the maximal noise distortion is contingent
on image content as the scores are not uniform tangentially for the receptive fields that lie on the same
eccentricity ring. Indeed, we did simplify our model by computing an average and fitting the sigmoid.
However, computing an average should approximate the maximal distortion for the receptive field
size on that eccentricity in the perceptual space for the human observer i.e. the metameric boundary.
We elaborate more on this idea in the discussion section.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
.0 .8 .6 .4 .2 .0
100000
UOIfOASIa。四。N—
scale=0.3	scale=0.4	scale=0.5
scale=0.6	scale=0.7
XIOIIμo4jsIa。-ON.
d = 1.240
d=1.196
0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0 0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0 0.0 0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0 0.0 0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.) Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.) Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.) Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.) Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Uo£02SIa ①SION&
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Figure 9: Top: The average α-noise distortion over the entire visual field for our 10 images without
assuming tangential homogeneity. Notice that on average, α increases radially. Bottom: The γ(∙)
which completely defines the α-noise distortion for any receptive field as a function of its size (radius).
scale=0.3
scale=0.5
(b) Rendering metamers via varying s.
(a) A scale invariant Y(O)
Figure 10: Metamer generation proces for Experiment 2. We modulate the distortion for each
receptive field according to γ to perform an optimization as in Freeman & Simoncelli (2011).
4.2	Experiment 2: Psychophysical Evaluation of Metamerism with human observers
Given that we have estimated the value of α anywhere in the visual field via the γ function, we can
now render our metamers as a function of the single scaling parameter (s), as the receptive field size
z is also a function of s as shown in Figure 10. The psychophysical optimization procedure is now
tractable on human observers and has the following form where 0 < d0(s,γ(z(S); S)∣θobs) < W:
S0 = argmax E[d0(s,γ(z(s))∣θobs)]	(10)
S
Inspired by the evaluations of Wallis et al. (2016), we wanted to test our metamers on a group of
observers performing two different ABX discrimination tasks in a roving design:
1.	Discriminating between Synthesized images (Synth vS Synth): This has been done in the
original study of Freeman & Simoncelli. While this test does not gaurantee metamerism
(Reference vS Synth), it has become a standard evaluation when probing for metamerism.
2.	Discriminating between the Synthesized and Reference images (Synth vS Reference). This
metamerism test, was not previously reported in Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) for their
original images and is the most rigorous evaluation. Recently Wallis et al. (2018) argued
that any model that maps an image to white noise might gaurantee metamerism under the
Synth vS Synth condition but not against the original/reference image, thus is not a metamer.
We had a group of 3 observers agnostic to the peripheral distortions and purposes of the experiment
performed an interleaved Synth vs Synth and Synth vs Reference experiment for NF metamers for
the previous set of images (Fig. 6). An SR EyeLink 1000 desk mount was used to monitor their
gaze for the center forced fixation ABX task as shown in Figure 11. In each trial, observers were
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
200ms	600ms
200ms
600ms	200ms
400ms
Unlimited
Time
Figure 11: Experiment 2 shows the ABX metamer discrimination task done by the observers. Humans
must fixate at the center of the image (no eye-movements) throughout the trial for it to be valid.
(3d)t①」」oɔ UO=」Od0i
Figure 12: The results of the 3 observers and the pooled observer (average; shown on far right) for
the Synth vs Reference and Synth vs Synth experiment for our metamers. The error bars denote the
68% confidence interval after bootstrapping the trials per observer.
shown 3 images where their task is to match the third image to the 1st or the 2nd. Each observer
saw each of the 10 images 30 times per scaling factor (5) per discriminability type (2) totalling 3000
trials per observer. Images were rendered at 512 × 512 px, and we fixed the monitor at 52cm viewing
distance and 800 × 600px resolution so that the stimuli subtended 26 deg ×26 deg. The monitor was
linearly calibrated with a maximum luminance of 115.83 ± 2.12 cd/m2. We then estimated the critical
scaling factor s0, and absorbing factors β0 of the roving ABX task to fit a psychometric function
for Proportion Correct (PC) as in Freeman & Simoncelli (2011); Wallis et al. (2018), where the
detectability is computed via d2(S) = βo(1 -黑)1 S>S0，and
PC (S)=φ( √s) H 竽 H 嘿 H F!	(11)
Results: Absorbing gain factors β0 and critical scales S0 per observer are shown in Figure 12, where
the fits were made using a least squares curve fitting model and bootstrap sampling n = 10000 times
to produce the 68% confidence intervals. Lapse rates (λ) were also included for robustness of fit as
in Wichmann & Hill (2001). Analogous to Freeman & Simoncelli (2011), we find that the critical
scaling factor is 0.51 when doing the Synth vs Synth experiment which match V2, a critical region in
the brain that has been identified to respond to texture as in Long et al. (2018); Ziemba et al. (2016).
This suggests that the parameters we use to capture and transfer texture statistics which are different
from the correlations of a steerable pyramid decomposition as proposed in Portilla & Simoncelli
(2000), might the match perceptual discrimination rates of the FS metamers. This does not imply that
the models are perceptually equivalent, but it aligns with the results of Ustyuzhaninov et al. (2017)
which shows that even a basis of random filters can also capture texture statistics, thus different
flavors of metamer models can be created with different statistics. In addition, we find that the critical
scaling factor for the Synth VS Reference experiment is less than 0.5 (~ 0.25, matchingV1) for the
pooled observer as validated recently by Wallis et al. (2018) for their CNN synthesis and FS model
for the Synth vs Reference condition.
5	Discussion
There has been a recent surge in interest with regards to developing and testing new metamer models:
The SideEye model developed by Fridman et al. (2017), uses a fully convolutional network (FCN)
as in Long et al. (2015) and learns to map an input image into a Texture Tiling Model (TTM)
mongrel (Rosenholtz et al. (2012)). Their end-to-end model is also feedforward like ours, but no use
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
of noise is incorporated in the generation pipeline making their model fully deterministic. At first
glance this seems to be an advantage rather a limitation, however it limits the biological plausilibility
of metameric response as the same input image should be able to create more than one metamer.
Another model which has recently been proposed is the CNN synthesis model developed by Wallis
et al. (2018). The CNN synthesis model is gradient-descent based and is closest in flavor to the
FS model, with the difference that their texture statistics are provided by a gramian matrix of filter
activations of multiple layers of a VGGNet, rather than those used in Portilla & Simoncelli (2000).
The question of whether the scaling parameter is the only parameter to be optimized for metamerism
still seems to be open. This has been questioned early in Rosenholtz et al. (2012), and recently
proposed and studied by Wallis et al. (2018), who suggest that metamers are driven by image content,
rather than bouma’s law (scaling factor). Figure 9 suggests that on average, it does seem that α
must increase in proportion to retinal eccentricity, but this is conditioned by the image content of
each receptive field. We believe that the hyperparametric nature of our model sheds some light into
reconciling these two theories. Recall that in Figures (4, 8), we found that certain images can be
pushed stronger in the direction of it’s texturized version versus others given their location in the
encoded space, the local geometry of the surface, and their projection in the perceptual space. This
suggests that the average maximal distortion one can do is fixed contingent on the size of the receptive
field, but we are allowed to push further (increase α) for some images more than others, because the
direction of the distortion lies closer to the perceptual null space (making this difference perceptually
un-noticeable to the human observer). This is usually the case for regions of images that are periodic
like skies, or grass. Along the same lines, we elaborate in the Supplementary Material on how our
model may potentially explain why creating synthesized samples are metameric to each other at the
scales of (V1;V2), but only generated samples at the scale of V1 (s = 0.25) are metameric to the
reference image.
Our model is also different to others (FS and recently Wallis et al. (2018)) given the role of noise
in the computational pipeline. The previously mentioned models used noise as an initial seed
for the texture matching pipeline via gradient-descent, while we use noise as a proxy for texture
distortion that is directly associated with crowding in the visual field. One could argue that the
same response is achieved via both approaches, but our approach seems to be more biologically
plausible at the algorithmic level. In our model an image is fed through a non-linear hierarchical
system (simulated through a deep-net), and is corrupted by noise that matches the texture properties
of the input image (via AdaIN). This perceptual representation is perturbed along the direction of the
texture-matched patch for each receptive field, and inverting such perturbed representation results
in a metamer. Figure 13 illustrates such perturbations which produce metamers when projected to
a 2D subspace via the locally linear embedding (LLE) algorithm (Roweis & Saul (2000)). Indeed,
the 10 encoded images do not fully overlap to each other and they are quite distant as seen in the
2D projection. However, foveated representations when perturbed with texture-like noise seem
to finely tile the perceptual space, and might act as a type of biological regularizer for human
observers who are consistently making eye-movements when processing visual information. This
suggests that robust representations might be achieved in the human visual system given its foveated
nature as non-uniform high-resolution imagery does not map to the same point in perceptual space.
Figure 13: Image embeddings.
o Image
Q Metamer
If this holds, perceptually invariant data-augmentation
schemes driven by metamerism may be a useful enhance-
ment for artificial systems that react oddly to adversar-
ial perturbations that exploit coarse perceptual mappings
(Goodfellow et al. (2015); Tabacof & Valle (2016); Be-
rardino et al. (2017)).
Understanding the underlying representations of
metamerism in the human visual system still remains a
challenge. In this paper we propose a model that emulates
metameric responses via a foveated feed-forward style
transfer network. We find that correctly calibrating
such perturbations (a consequence of internal noise that
match texture representation) in the perceptual space
and inverting such encoded representation results in a
metamer. Though our model is hyper-parametric in nature
we propose a way to reduce the parametrization via a
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
perceptual optimization scheme. Via a psychophysical experiment we empirically find that the critical
scaling factor also matches the rate of growth of the receptive fields in V2 (s = 0.5) as in Freeman
& Simoncelli (2011) when performing visual discrimination between synthesized metamers, and
match V1 (0.25) for reference metamers similar to Wallis et al. (2018). Finally, while our choice
of texture statistics and transfer is relu4_1 of a VGG19 and AdaIN respectively, our ×1000-fold
accelerated feed-forward metamer generation pipeline should be extendible to other models that
correctly compute texture/style statistics and transfer. This opens the door to rapidly generating
multiple flavors of visual metamers with applications in neuroscience and computer vision.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Xun Huang for sharing his code and valuable suggestions on AdaIN, Jeremy
Freeman for making his metamer code available, Jamie Burkes for collecting original high-quality
stimuli, N.C. Puneeth for insightful conversations on texture and masking, Christian Bueno for
informal lectures on homotopies, and Soorya Gopalakrishnan and Ekta Prashnani for insightful
discussions. Lauren Welbourne, Mordechai Juni, Miguel Lago, and Craig Abbey were also helpful
in editing the manuscript and giving positive feedback. We would also like to thank NVIDIA for
donating a Titan X GPU. This work was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
through grant 2 W911NF-09-0001 from the U.S. Army Research Office.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
References
Emre Akbas and Miguel P Eckstein. Object detection through search with a foveated visual system. PLoS
computational biology, 13(10):e1005743, 2017.
Benjamin Balas, Lisa Nakano, and Ruth Rosenholtz. A summary-statistic representation in peripheral vision
explains visual crowding. Journal ofvision, 9(12):13-13, 2009.
Johannes Ball6, Valero Laparra, and Eero P Simoncelli. End-to-end optimized image compression. International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Anthony J Bell and Terrence J Sejnowski. An information-maximization approach to blind separation and blind
deconvolution. Neural computation, 7(6):1129-1159, 1995.
Alexander Berardino, Valero Laparra, Johannes Ball6, and Eero Simoncelli. Eigen-distortions of hierarchical
representations. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 3530-3539, 2017.
Scott J Daly. Visible differences predictor: an algorithm for the assessment of image fidelity. In SPIE/IS&T 1992
Symposium on Electronic Imaging: Science and Technology, pp. 2-15. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 1992.
Arturo Deza and Miguel Eckstein. Can peripheral representations improve clutter metrics on complex scenes?
In Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2847-2855, 2016.
Jeremy Freeman and Eero P Simoncelli. Metamers of the ventral stream. Nature neuroscience, 14(9):1195-1201,
2011.
Lex Fridman, Benedikt Jenik, Shaiyan Keshvari, Bryan Reimer, Christoph Zetzsche, and Ruth Rosen-
holtz. Sideeye: A generative neural network based simulator of human peripheral vision. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.04568, 2017.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, Aaron Hertzmann, and Eli Shechtman. Controlling
perceptual factors in neural style transfer. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2017.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
DM Green and JA Swets. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. 1966. New York, 888:889, 1966.
Olivier J H6naff. Testing a mechanismfor temporal prediction in perceptual, neural, and machine representations.
PhD thesis, Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY, Sept 2018.
Olivier J HCnaff and Eero P Simoncelli. Geodesics of learned representations. International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization.
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional
adversarial networks. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-
resolution. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 694-711. Springer, 2016.
Shaiyan Keshvari and Ruth Rosenholtz. Pooling of continuous features provides a unifying account of crowding.
Journal of Vision, 16(39), 2016.
V Laparra, A Berardino, J BallC, and EP Simoncelli. Perceptually optimized image rendering. Journal of the
Optical Society of America. A, Optics, image science, and vision, 34(9):1511, 2017.
Bria Long, Chen-Ping Yu, and Talia Konkle. Mid-level visual features underlie the high-level categorical
organization of the ventral stream. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2018. ISSN 0027-
8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1719616115. URL http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2018/08/30/
1719616115.
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3431-3440, 2015.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Jeffrey Lubin. A human vision system model for objective picture quality measurements. In Broadcasting
Convention, 1997. International, pp. 498-503. IET, 1997.
Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of complex wavelet
coefficients. International Journal of Computer Vision, 40(1):49-70, 2000.
Ruth Rosenholtz, Jie Huang, Alvin Raj, Benjamin J Balas, and Livia Ilie. A summary statistic representation in
peripheral vision explains visual search. Journal of vision, 12(4):14-14, 2012.
Sam T Roweis and Lawrence K Saul. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. science,
290(5500):2323-2326, 2000.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Pedro Tabacof and Eduardo Valle. Exploring the space of adversarial images. In 2016 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 426-433. IEEE, 2016.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Vadim Lebedev, Victor Lempitsky, et al. Texture networks: Feed-forward synthesis of
textures and stylized images. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
1349-1357, 2016.
Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Wieland Brendel, Leon A Gatys, and Matthias Bethge. What does it take to generate natural
textures? International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Thomas S. A. Wallis, Christina M Funke, Alexander S Ecker, Leon A. Gatys, Felix A. Wichmann, and Matthias
Bethge. Image content is more important than bouma’s law for scene metamers. bioRxiv, 2018. doi:
10.1101/378521. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/07/30/378521.
Thomas SA Wallis, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Testing models of peripheral encoding using
metamerism in an oddity paradigm. Journal of vision, 16(2):4-4, 2016.
Z Wang and Q Li. Information content weighting for perceptual image quality assessment. IEEE transactions
on image processing: a publication of the IEEE Signal Processing Society, 20(5):1185-1198, 2011.
Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality assessment.
In The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003, volume 2, pp. 1398-1402.
Ieee, 2003.
Felix A Wichmann and N Jeremy Hill. The psychometric function: I. fitting, sampling, and goodness of fit.
Perception & psychophysics, 63(8):1293-1313, 2001.
Corey M Ziemba, Jeremy Freeman, J Anthony Movshon, and Eero P Simoncelli. Selectivity and tolerance for
visual texture in macaque v2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(22):E3140-E3149,
2016.
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
6 Supplementary Material
Reference Metamer	Reference Metamer
Figure 14: Reference Metamers at the scale of s = 0.25, at which they are indiscriminable to the
human observer. The color coding scheme matches the data points of the optimization in Experiment 1
and the psychophysics of Experiment 2. All images used in the experiments were generated originally
at 512 × 512 px subtending 26×26 d.v.a (degrees of visual angle).
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Algorithm 1 Pipeline for Metamer hyperparameter Y(Q) search
1:	procedure Estimate HypERpaRaMeter: Y(O) function
2:	Choose image dataset SI.
3:	Pick hyperparameter search step size αstep. Pick scale search step size sstep.
4:	for each image I ∈ S I do
5:	for each scale s ∈ [sinit : sstep : sfinal] do
6:	Compute baseline metamer MFS (I)
7:	for each α ∈ [0 : αstep : 1] do
8:	Compute metamer MNF(I)
9:	end for
10:	Find the α for each receptive field that minimizes: E(∆-SSIM)2.
11:	Fit the YS(o) function to collection of α values.
12:	end for
13:	end for
14:	Perform Permutation test on Ys for all s.
15:	if Ys is independent of s then
16:	Ys = Y
17:	else
18:	Perform regression of parameters of Ys as a function f of s.
19:	Ys = Yf(s)
20:	end if
21:	end procedure
6.1	HypERpaRamEtER sEaRcH algoRitHm
Algorithm 1 fully describes the outline of Experiment 1.
6.2	ModEl spEcificiations and tRaining
We use k = kp + kf spatial control windows, kp pooling regions (θr receptive fields × θt eccentricity
rings) and kf = 1 fovea (at an approximate 3 deg radius). Computing the metamers for the scales of
{0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7} required {300, 186, 125, 102, 90} pooling regions excluding the fovea where we
applied local style transfer. Details regarding the decoder network architecture and training can be
seen in Huang & Belongie (2017). We used the publicly available code by Huang and Belongie for
our decoder which was trained on ImageNet and a collection of publicly available paintings to learn
how to invert texture as well. In their training pipeline, the encoder is fixed and the decoder is trained
to learn how to invert the structure of the content image, and the texture of the style image, thus when
the content and style image are the same, then the decoder approximates the inverse of the encoder
(D ~ E-1). We also re-trained another decoder on a set of 100 images all being scenes (as a control
to check for potential differences), and achieved similar outputs (visual inspection) to the publicly
available one of Huang & Belongie. The dimensionality of the input of the encoder is 1 ×512×512,
and the dimensionality of the output (relu4_1) is 512 × 64 × 64, it is at the 64 × 64 resolution that we
are applying foveated pooling from the initial guidance channels of the 512× 512 input.
Constructions of biologically-tuned peripheral representations are explained in detail in Freeman
& Simoncelli (2011); Akbas & Eckstein (2017); Deza & Eckstein (2016), and are governed by the
following equations:
COS 2( ∏( x="芳))；
f (χ) = ` 1;
-COS 2(∏ (”)/2)) + 1;
-(1 +1o)/2 < X ≤ (10 - 1)/2
(10 - 1)/2 < x ≤ (1 -1o)∕2	(12)
(1 -1o)∕2 < x ≤ (1 +1o)∕2
/θ-(wθn + Wθ(2 t0))ʌ	2π
hn(θ) = f(---w^— )； wθ = N； n = 0,…，Nθ - 1	(13)
gn( e) = f( l°g( e)-[log( eO) + w,(n + 1)]} w, = l°g( (e) -log(e O); “ = °,.., Ne- 1	(14)
we	Ne
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
where f (x) is a cosine profiling function that smoothes a regular step function, and hn(θ),gn(e), are
the averaging values of the pooling region wi at a specific angle θ and radial eccentricity e in the
visual field. In addition we used the default values of visual radius of er = 26 deg, and e0 = 0.25 deg 1,
and t0 = 1/2. The scale s defines the number of eccentricities Ne, as well as the number of polar
pooling regions Nθ from h0, 2π]. We perform the foveated pooling operation on the output of the
Encoder. Since the encoder is fully convolutional with no fully connected layers, guidance channels
can be used to do localized (foveated) style transfer.
Our pix2pix U-Net refinement module took 3 days to train on a Titan X GPU, and was trained with
64 crops (256 × 256) per image on 100 images, including horizontally mirrored versions. We ran
200 training epochs of these 12800 images on the U-Net architecture proposed by Isola et al. (2017)
which preserves local image structure given an adversarial and L2 loss.
6.3	Metamer Model Comparison
The following table summarizes the main similarities and differences across all current models:
	Model	FS (2011)	CNN-SyntheSiS (2018)	SideEye (2017)	NF (Ours)
Feed-Forward	-	-	X	X
Input	Noise	Noise	Image	Image
Multi-ReSolution	X	X	-	-
Texture Statistics	Steerable Pyramid	VGG19 conv- 1i, 2i , 3i ,4i,5i	Steerable Pyramid	VGG19 relu4i
Style Transfer	Portilla & Simoncelli	Gatys et al.	Rosenholtz et al.	Huang & Belongie
FoVeated Pooling	X	X	(Implicit Via FCN)	X
Decoder (trained on)	-	-	metamers/mongrels	images
	MoVeable FoVea		X			X		X		X	
Use of Noise	Initialization	Initialization	-	Perturbation
Non-Deterministic	X	X	-	X
Direct ComPutable InVerSe	-	-	(Implicit Via FCN)		X	
Rendering Time	hours	minutes	miliseconds	seconds
Image type	scenes	scenes/texture	scenes	scenes
Critical Scaling WS Synth)	0.46	〜{0.39/0.41}	Not Required	0.5
Critical Scaling (vs Reference)	Not Available	〜{0.2/0.35}	Not Required	0.24
Experimental design	ABX	Oddball	-	ABX
Reference Image in Exp.	Metamer	Original	-	Compressed via Decoder
Number of Images tested	4	400	-	10
Trials per observers		〜1000			〜1000		-		〜3000	
Table 1: Metamer Model comparison
Encoding:
Decoding:
£(M)= £(1) + N
M = Γ>(^(∕) + N)
Encoding:	2(M)= £(1)
Decoding:	M = a 制Iin	£(N)Il
Original Freeman & Simoncelli
Figure 15: Algorithmic (top) and visual (bottom) comparisons between our metamers and a sample
from Freeman & Simoncelli (2011) for a scaling factor of 0.3. Each model has it’s own limitations:
The FS model can not directly compute an inverse of the encoded representation to generate a metamer,
requiring an iterative gradient descent procedure. Our NF model is limited by the capacity of the
encoder-decoder architecture as it does not achieve lossless compression (perfect reconstruction).
Reference
NeuroFovea
1We remove central regions with an area smaller than 100 pixels, and group them into the fovea
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Sample Metamer A
Sample Metamer B
Encoded Space
Encoded Space
The distance in green between a V1 metamer and
the content image is the same as the two V2
metamers, potentially explaining how they are
perceptually indistinguishable to each other at different
scaling factors given the type of ABX task.
Figure 16: Decomposition and overview of the metamer generation process in the Image space, the
Encoded space and the Perceptual space. The original image patch is coded in blue, the V1 metamers
are coded in purple, and the V2 metamers are coded in pink. Dark brown represents the initial white
noise that is later stylized via AdaIN through S(。). Note that these two points are far away to each
other in image space, but quite closeby in perceptual space as they are also ‘metameric’ to each other.
They are not placed on the actual encoded manifold since these points are not in the near vicinity of
either C nor S(N), as they have no scene-like structure. The interpolation for maximal distortion is
done along the line between C and S(N), these are the points in blue and red in the encoded space
which represent the extremes of α = 0.0 and α = 1.0 respectively.
6.4	Interpretability of V1 and V2 Metamers
In Figure 16, we illustrate the metamer generation process for two sample metamers, given different
noise perturbations. Here, we decompose Figure 4 into two separate ones for each metamer given
each noise perturbation, and provide an additional visualization of the projection of the metamers in
perceptual space, gaining theoretical insight on how and why metamerism arises for the synth-vs-synth
condition in V2, and the synth-vs-reference condition in V1 as we demonstrated experimentally.
6.5	Pilot Experiments
E①」Joo uoEodoJd
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Freeman & Simoncelli ABX task
. Synth Vs Reference
S Synth Vs Synth
'LR' 'SO' 'DS' 'JZ' 'OD' 'SW'
List of Pilot ObserVers
Figure 17: Pilot Data on FS metamers.
In a preliminary psychophysical study, we ran an
experiment with a collection of 50 images and 6 ob-
servers on the FS metamers. Observers performed a
single session of 200 trials of the FS metamers where
the scale was fixed at s = 0.5. We found the follow-
ing: While we found that the synthesized images
were metameric to each other for the scaling factor of
0.5, the FS metamers were not metameric to their ref-
erence high-quality images at the scale of 0.5. Only a
sub-group of observers: ‘LR’,‘SO’,‘DS’ scored well
above chance in terms of discriminating the images
in the ABX task. These results are in synch with the
evalutions done by Wallis et al. (2018), which varied
scale and found a critical value to be less than 0.5 and
rather closer to 0.25 within the range of V1.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
6.6	Estimation of Lapse-rate (λ) per observer
The motivation behind estimating the lapse rate is to quantify how engaged was the observer in the
experiment, as well as providing a robust estimate of the parameters in the fit of the psychometric
functions. Not accounting for lapse rate may dramatically affect the estimation of these parameters
as suggested in Wichmann & Hill (2001). In general lapse rates are computed by penalizing a
psychometric function ψ(o) that ranges between some lower bound and upper bound usually [0,1].
To estimate the lapse rate λ, a new ψ0(o) is defined to have the following form:
ψ0(o) = b + (1 - b - λ)ψ(o)
(15)
Recall that for us, our psychometric fitting function ψ(o) = PCABX(S) is defined by Equation 11 and
parametrized by both the absorbing factor β0 and the critical scaling factor s0:
PCABX(s) = Φ
(16)
where we have:
d2(S) = A>(1- s2)lS>S0	(17)
s2
To compute the new ψ0(o), We notice first that our ψ is bounded between [0.5,1], and that the new ψ0
will be a linear combination of a correct guess for a lapse, and a correct decision for a non-lapse from
which we obtain:
PC(S) = λ + (1 - 2λ)PCABX(S)	(18)
as derived in Henaff (2018) which includes lapse rates for an AXB task. When fitting the curves
for each of the n = 10000 bootstrapped samples, we restricted the lapse rate to vary between
λ = [0.00, 0.06] as suggested in Wichmann & Hill (2001), and found the following lapse rates:
Observer 1: λZRSQ = 0.0248 ± 0.0209, λSZQS = 0.0430 ± 0.0228.
Observer 2: λRASL = 0.0008 ± 0.0062, λSASL = 0.0166 ± 0.0215.
Observer 3: λRASG = 0.0141 ± 0.0243, λSAGS = 0.0218 ± 0.0236.
We later averaged these lapse rates as there is an equal probability of each type of trial to appear
(Synth vs Synth, or Reference vs Synth), and refitted each curve with the new pooled lapse rate
estimates λ0. Indeed, each observer did both experiments in a roving paradigm, rather than doing one
experiment after the other - thus we should only have one estimate for lapse rate per observer. It is
worth mentioning that re-performing the fits with separate lapse rates did not significantly affect the
estimates of critical scaling values, as one might argue that higher lapse rates will significantly move
the critical scaling factor estimates. This is not the case as the absorbing factor β does not place an
upper bound for the psychometric function at 1.
Our critical estimates of lapse rates were: λZQ = 0.0339, λAL = 0.0087, λAG = 0.0179, as shown in
Figure 12.
The estimates (critical scale (S0), absorbing factor (β0) and lapse rate (λ0)) shown for the pooled
observer were obtained by averaging the estimates over the 3 observers.
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
6.7	Robustness of estimation of γ function
In this subsection we show how the perceptual optimization pipeline is robust to a selection of IQA
metrics such as MS-SSIM (multi-scale SSIM 2) from Wang et al. (2003) and IW-SSIM (information
content weighted SSIM) from Wang & Li (2011).
There are 3 key observations that stem from these additional results:
1.	The sigmoidal natural of the γ function is found again and is also scale independent, showing
the broad applicability of our perceptual optimization scheme and how it is extendable to
other IQA metrics that satisfy SSIM-like properties (upper bounded, symmetric and unique
maximum).
2.	The tuning curves of MS-SSIM and IW-SSIM look almost identical, given that IW-SSIM is
not more than a weighted version of MS-SSIM where the weighting function is the mutual
information between the encoded representations of the reference and distortion image
across multiple resolutions. Differences are stronger in IW-SSIM when the region over
which it is evaluated is quite large (i.e. an entire image), however given that our pooling
regions are quite small in size, the IW-SSIM score asymptotes to the MS-SSIM score. In
addition both scores converge to very similar values given that we are averaging these scores
over the images and over all the pooling regions that lie within the same eccentricity ring.
We found that 〜90% of the maximum a's had the same values given the 20 point sampling
grid that we use in our optimization. Perhaps a different selection of IW hyperparameters
(we used the default set), finer sampling schemes for the optimal value search, as well as
averaging over more images, may produce visible differences between both metrics.
3.	The sigmoidal slope is smaller for both IW-SSIM and MS-SSIM vs SSIM, which yields more
conservative distortions (as α is smaller for each receptive field). This implies that the model
can still create metamers at the estimated found scaling factors of 0.21 and 0.50, however
they may have different critical scaling factors for the reference vs synth experiment, and for
the synth vs synth experiment. Future work should focus on psychophysically finding these
critical scaling factors, and if they still are within the range of rate of growth of receptive
field sizes of V1 and V2.
u∙2-o∞Iα φs∙δNIδ
SSIM	MS-SSIM	IW-SSIM
Figure 18: A collection of scale invariant γ(o)'s across multiple IQA metrics for the perceptual
optimization scheme of Experiment 1. In this figure we superimpose all maximal α-noise distortions
for each scale, and find a function that fits all the points showing that γ is indepedent of scale.
2scale in the context of SSIM is referred to resolution (as in scales of a laplacian pyramid), and is not to be
confused with the scaling factor s of our experiments which encode the rate of groth of the receptive fields.
19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
SSIM Perceptual Optimization
scale=0.3
scale=0.4
scale=0.5	scale=0.6	scale=0.7
UOIco3≡α,02ONIe
0 00 00
.0 .8 .6 .4 .2
10000
UolfOIα0N.
d=1.240
0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0 0.0 0.5	1.0	1.5 2.0	2.5	3.0 0.0 0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0 2.5	3.0 0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.) Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
(a)	Perceptual Optimization with SSIM.
MS-SSIM Perceptual Optimization
scale=0.3
scale=0.4	scale=0.5
scale=0.6	scale=0.7
αolt3osIaφSTONIa
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
UOIcosIaqsioni≡
d=0.736
0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
(b)	Perceptual Optimization with MS-SSIM.
IW-SSIM Perceptual Optimization
αolfiosταωSIONIs
scale=0.3
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
scale=0.4
scale=0.5
scale=0.6
scale=0.7
αo3IOsIα asON.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
d=0.614
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
d=0.640
d=0.733
d=0.758
d=0.733
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
Radius of R.F. (d.v.a.)
(c)	Perceptual Optimization with IW-SSIM.
Figure 19: Top: The maximum α-noise distortion computed per pooling region, and collapsed over
all images for each IQA metric. Bottom: When averaging across all the pooling regions for each
retinal eccentricity, We find that the Y function is invariant to scale as in our original experiment -
suggesting that our perceptual optimization scheme is flexible across IQA metrics.
20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Histograms from Permutation Test
scale=0.5	scale=0.6	scale=0.7
WlSS WISS,Sw WlSS,MI
scale=0.3
scale=0.4
selpmaS detumreP
fo rebmuN
Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution Difference Distribution
Difference Distribution
selpmaS detumreP
fo rebmuN
selpmaS detumre
fo rebmuN
Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution	Difference Distribution
Figure 20: A permutation test was ran and determined that each γ function is also scale independent
under the 99% confidence interval (CI), as we increased the CI to account for false discovery rates
(FDR). Indeed, when we perform the permutation tests and use a 95% confidence interval (shown in
the figure with the vertical lines in cyan), all curves except for MS-SSIM and IW-SSIM only for the
scaling factor of 0.3 show a significant difference P ~ 0.02 (non FDR-corrected), potentially due to
small receptive field sizes, which bias the estimates. All other differences in the d parameter of the
sigmoid function, with respect to the average fitted sigmoid, are statistically insignificant.
21