Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Visual Explanation by Interpretation:
Improving Visual Feedback Capabilities of
Deep Neural Networks
Jose Oramas M.*
Kaili Wang*
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI
Tinne Tuytelaars
Ab stract
Interpretation and explanation of deep models is critical towards wide adoption
of systems that rely on them. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme for both
interpretation as well as explanation in which, given a pretrained model, we auto-
matically identify internal features relevant for the set of classes considered by the
model, without relying on additional annotations. We interpret the model through
average visualizations of this reduced set of features. Then, at test time, we explain
the network prediction by accompanying the predicted class label with support-
ing visualizations derived from the identified features. In addition, we propose
a method to address the artifacts introduced by strided operations in deconvNet-
based visualizations. Moreover, we introduce an8Flower, a dataset specifically
designed for objective quantitative evaluation of methods for visual explanation.
Experiments on the MNIST, ILSVRC12, Fashion144k and an8Flower datasets show
that our method produces detailed explanations with good coverage of relevant
features of the classes of interest.
1	Introduction
Methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive results for several computer
vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection and image generation. Combined with
the general tendency in the Computer Vision community of developing methods with a focus on
high quantitative performance, this has motivated the wide adoption of DNN-based methods, despite
the initial skepticism due to their black-box characteristics. In this work, we aim for more visually-
descriptive predictions and propose means to improve the quality of the visual feedback capabilities of
DNN-based methods. Our goal is to bridge the gap between methods aiming at model interpretation,
i.e., understanding what a given trained model has actually learned, and methods aiming at model
explanation, i.e., justifying the decisions made by a model.
Model interpretation of DNNs is commonly achieved in two ways: either by a) manually inspecting
visualizations of every single filter (or a random subset thereof) from every layer of the network (Yosin-
ski et al. (2015); Zeiler & Fergus (2014)) or, more recently, by b) exhaustively comparing the internal
activations produced by a given model w.r.t. a dataset with pixel-wise annotations of possibly relevant
concepts (Bau et al. (2017); Fong & Vedaldi (2018)). These two paths have provided useful insights
into the internal representations learned by DNNs. However, they both have their own weaknesses. For
the first case, the manual inspection of filter responses introduces a subjective bias, as was evidenced
by Gonzalez-Garcia et al. (2017). In addition, the inspection of every filter from every layer becomes
a cognitive-expensive practice for deeper models, which makes it a noisy process. For the second
case, as stated by Bau et al. (2017), the interpretation capabilities over the network are limited by the
concepts for which annotation is available. Moreover, the cost of adding annotations for new concepts
is quite high due to its pixel-wise nature. A third weakness, shared by both cases, is inherited by the
way in which they generate spatial filter-wise responses, i.e., either through deconvolution-based
heatmaps (Springenberg et al. (2015); Zeiler & Fergus (2014)) or by up-scaling the activation maps
at a given layer/filter to the image space (Bau et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2016)). On the one hand,
deconvolution methods are able to produce heatmaps with high level of detail from any filter in
* denotes equal contribution
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 1: Left: Proposed training/testing pipeline. Center: Visual explanations generated by our method.
Predicted class labels are enriched with heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that
contributed to the prediction. Note these features may come from the object itself as well as from the context.
On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features come from. The layer type is
color-coded (green for convolutional and pink for fully connected). Right: Visualization comparison. Note how
our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts introduced by deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. At the
same time, our method is able to produce a more detailed visual feedback than up-scaled activation maps.
the network. However, as can be seen in Fig. 1 (right), they suffer from artifacts introduced by
strided operations in the back-propagation process. Up-scaled activation maps, on the other hand, can
significantly lose details when displaying the response of filters with large receptive field from deeper
layers. Moreover, they have the weakness of only being computable for convolutional layers.
In order to alleviate these issues, we start from the hypothesis proven by Bau et al. (2017); Yosinski
et al. (2015), that only a small subset of the internal filters of a network encode features that are
important for the task that the network addresses. Based on that assumption, we propose a method
which, given a trained DNN model, automatically identifies a set of relevant internal filters whose
encoded features serve as indicators for the class of interest to be predicted (Fig. 1 left). These filters
can originate from any type of internal layer of the network, i.e., convolutional, fully connected, etc.
Selecting them is formulated as a μ-lasso optimization problem in which a sparse set of filter-wise
responses are linearly combined in order to predict the class of interest. At test time, we move
from interpretation to explanation. Given an image, a set of identified relevant filters, and a class
prediction, we accompany the predicted class label with heatmap visualizations of the top-responding
relevant filters for the predicted class, see Fig. 1 (center). In addition, by improving the resampling
operations within deconvnet-based methods, we are able to address the artifacts introduced in the back-
propagation process, see Fig. 1 (right). The code and models used to generate our visual explanations
can be found in the following link 1. Overall, the proposed method removes the requirement of
additional expensive pixel-wise annotation, by relying on the same annotations used to train the initial
model. Moreover, by using our own variant of a deconvolution-based method, our method is able
to consider the spatial response from any filter at any layer while still providing visually pleasant
feedback. This allows our method to reach some level of explanation by interpretation.
Finally, recent approaches to evaluate explanation methods measure the validity of an explanation
either via user studies (Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Selvaraju et al. (2017)) or by measuring its effect
on a proxy task, e.g. object detection/segmentation (Zhou et al. (2015); Zhang et al. (2016)). While
user studies inherently add subjectivity, benchmarking through a proxy task steers the optimization of
the explanation method towards such task. Here we propose an objective evaluation via an8Flower,
a synthetic dataset where the discriminative feature between the classes of interest is controlled.
This allows us to produce ground-truth masks for the regions to be highlighted by the explanation.
Furthermore, it allows us to quantitatively measure the performance of methods for model explanation.
The main contributions of this work are four-fold. First, we propose an automatic method based on
feature selection to identify the network-encoded features that are important for the prediction of a
given class. This alleviates the requirement of exhaustive manual inspection or additional expensive
pixel-wise annotations required by existing methods. Second, the proposed method is able to provide
visual feedback with higher-level of detail over up-scaled raw activation maps and improved quality
over recent deconvolution+guided back-propagation methods. Third, the proposed method is general
enough to be applied to any type of network, independently of the type of layers that compose it.
Fourth, we release a dataset and protocol specifically designed for the evaluation of methods for
model explanation. To the best of our knowledge this is the first dataset aimed at such task.
1 http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/~joramas/projects/visualExplanationByInterpretation
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
This paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we position our work w.r.t. existing work. Sec. 3
presents the pipeline and inner-workings of the proposed method. In Sec. 4, we conduct a series of
experiments evaluating different aspects of the proposed method. We draw conclusions in Sec. 5.
2	Related Work
Interpretation. Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Zhou et al. (2015) proposed to visualize properties of the
function modelled by a network by systematically covering (part of) the input image and measuring
the difference of activations. The assumption is that occlusion of important parts of the input will lead
to a significant drop in performance. This procedure is applied at test time to identify the regions of
the image that are important for classification. However, the resolution of the explanation will depend
on the region size. Another group of works focuses on linking internal activations with semantic
concepts. Escorcia et al. (2015) proposed a feature selection method in which the neuron activations
of a DNN trained with object categories are combined to predict object attributes. Similarly, Bau et al.
(2017); Fong & Vedaldi (2018); Zhang et al. (2018) proposed to exhaustively match the activations of
every filter from the convolutional layers against a dataset with pixel-wise annotated concepts. While
both methods provide important insights on the semantic concepts encoded by the network, they
are both limited by the concepts for which annotation is available. Similar to Escorcia et al. (2015),
we discover relevant internal filters through a feature selection method. Different from it, we link
internal activations directly to the same annotations used to train the initial model. This removes the
expensive requirement of additional annotations. A third line of works aims at discovering frequent
visual patterns (Doersch et al. (2015); Rematas et al. (2015)) occurring in image collections. These
patterns have a high semantic coverage which makes them effective as means for summarization. We
adopt the idea of using visualizations of (internal) mid-level elements as means to reveal the relevant
features encoded, internally, by a DNN. More precisely, we use the average visualizations used by
these works in order to interpret, visually, what the network has actually learned.
Explanation. For the sake of brevity, we ignore methods which generate explanations via bounding
boxes (Karpathy & Fei-Fei (2017); Oramas M. & Tuytelaars (2016)) or text (Hendricks et al. (2016)),
and focus on methods capable of generating visualizations with pixel-level precision. Zeiler & Fergus
(2014) proposed a deconvolutional network (Deconvnet) which uses activations from a given top layer
and reverses the forward pass to reveal which visual patterns from the input image are responsible
for the observed activations. Simonyan et al. (2014) used information from the lower layers and the
input image to estimate which image regions are responsible for the activations seen at the top layers.
Similarly, Bach et al. (2015) decomposed the classification decision into pixel-wise contributions
while preserving the propagated quantities between adjacent layers. Later, Springenberg et al. (2015)
extended these works by introducing “guided back-propagation”, a technique that removes the effect
of units with negative contributions in forward and backward pass. This resulted in sharper heatmap
visualizations. Zhou et al. (2016) propose Global Average Pooling, i.e., a weighted sum over the
spatial locations of the activations of the filters of the last convolutional layer, which results in a class
activation map. Finally, a heatmap is generated by upsampling the class activation map to the size of
the input image. Selvaraju et al. (2017) extended this by providing a more efficient way for computing
the weights for the activation maps. Recently, Chattopadhyay et al. (2018) extended this with neuron
specific weights with the goal of improving object localization on the generated visualizations. Here,
we take DeconvNet with guided-backpropagation as starting point given its maturity and ability to
produce visual feedback with pixel-level precision. However, we change the internal operations in
the backward pass with the goal of reducing visual artifacts introduced by strided operations while
maintaining the network structure.
Benchmarking. Zhou et al. (2016); Zhang et al. (2016) proposed a saliency-based evaluation where
explanations are assessed based on how well they highlight complete instances of the classes of
interest. Thus, treating model explanation as a weakly-supervised object detection/segmentation
problem. This saliency-based protocol assumes that explanations are exclusive to intrinsic object
features, e.g. color, shape, parts, etc. and completely ignores extrinsic features, e.g. scene, environ-
ment, related to the depicted context. Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Selvaraju et al. (2017) proposed a
protocol based on crowd-sourced user studies. These type of evaluations are not only characterized
by their high-cost, but also suffer from subjective bias (Gonzalez-Garcia et al. (2017)). Moreover,
Das et al. (2016) suggest that deep models and humans do not necessarily attend to the same input
evidence even when they predict the same output. Here we propose a protocol where the regions to
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
be highlighted by the explanation are predefined. The goal is to objectify the evaluation and relax
the subjectivity introduced by human-based evaluations. Moreover, our protocol makes no strong
assumption regarding the type of features highlighted by the the explanations.
3	Proposed Method
The proposed method consists of two parts. At training time, a set of relevant layer/filter pairs are
identified for every class of interest j . This results in a relevance weight wj , associated to class j, for
every filter-wise response x computed internally by the network. At test time, an image I is pushed
through the network producing the class prediction j=F (I). Then, taking into account the internal
responses x, and relevance weights Wj for the predicted class j, We generate visualizations indicating
the image regions that contributed to this prediction.
3.1	Identifying Relevant Features
One of the strengths of deep models is their ability to learn abstract concepts from simpler ones. That
is, when an example is pushed into the model, a conclusion concerning a specific task can be reached
as a function of the results (activations) of intermediate operations at different levels (layers) of the
model. These intermediate results may hint at the “semantic” concepts that the model is taking into
account when making a decision. From this observation, and the fact that activations are typically
sparse, we make the assumption that some of the internal filters of a network encode features that
are important for the task that the network addresses. To this end, we follow a procedure similar to
Escorcia et al. (2015), aiming to predict each class j by the linear combination wj∈Rm of its internal
activations x, with m the total number of neurons/activations.
As an initial step, we extract the image-wise response xi. To this end, we compute the L2 norm of each
channel (filter response) within each layer and produce a 1-dimensional descriptor by concatenating
the responses from the different channels. This layer-specific descriptor is L1 -normalized in order
to compensate for the difference in length among different layers. Finally, we concatenate all the
layer-specific descriptors to obtain xi . In this process, we do not consider the last layer whose output
is directly related to the classes of interest, e.g. the last two layers from VGG-F Chatfield et al. (2014).
Following this procedure, we construct the matrix X∈Rm×N by passing each of the N training images
through the network F and storing the internal responses x. As such, the ith image of the dataset is
represented by a vector xi ∈Rm defined by the filter-wise responses at different layers. Furthermore,
the possible classes that the ith image belongs to are organized in a binary vector li ∈{0, 1}C where
C is the total number of classes. Putting the annotations from all the images together produces
the binary label matrix L=[l1, l2, ..., lN], with L∈RC×N. With these terms, we resort to solving the
equation:
W * = argminw ||X T W — LT ||F subject to : ||Wj ∣∣ι ≤ μ , ∀j = 1,…，C	(1)
with μ a parameter that allows controlling the sparsity. This is the matrix form of the μ-lasso problem.
This problem can be efficiently solved using the Spectral Gradient Projection method Mairal et al.
(2014); van den Berg & Friedlander (2008). The μ-lasso formulation is optimal for cases like
the ones obtained by ResNet where the number of internal activations is large compared to the
number of examples. After solving the μ-lasso problem, we have a matrix W =[wι ,w2,…，WC], with
W ∈Rm×C. We impose sparsity on W by enforcing the constraints on the L1 norm of Wj, i.e.,
∣∣Wj∣∣ι≤μ, ∀j = 1,…，C. As a result, each non-zero element in W represents a pair of network
layer p and filter index q (within the layer) of relevance.
3.2	Generating Visual Feedback
During training time (Section 3.1), we identified a set of relevant features (indicated by W) for the
classes of interest. At test time, we generate the feedback visualizations by taking into account the
response of these features on the content of the tested images. Towards this goal, we push an image
I through the network producing the class prediction j=F(I). During that pass, we compute the
internal filter-wise response vector xi following the procedure presented above. Then we compute
^
the response rj =(Wj ◦ χi), where ◦ represents the element-wise product between two vectors. Note
that the Wj vector is highly sparse, therefore adding an insignificant cost at test time. The features,
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 2: Heatmap visualization at lower layers of VGG-F . Note
how our method attenuates the grid-like artifacts introduced by
existing DeconvNet+GB methods (Springenberg et al. (2015)).
Forward Pass Operation Block
Input	M , O	Output
[AxA] -J S J ―[ΒxΒ]
Backward Pass ______ Ad'=resample( Ad, BIS=I )
Output	M , O	Input /
[AxA]	[S = 1	[Ad'xAd']
Figure 3: To attenuate artifacts , during
the backward pass, we set the stride to 1
(S = 1) and compensate by resampling
the input so that A0d = B|S=1.
•	1	∕r∙ 1 .	・	/ 杂 杂、	/	/	/	・1	/・	・ /F	1 ∙	. ∙	ʌ	F / F	/F
i.e., layer/filter pairs (p*,q*), With strongest contribution in the prediction j are selected as those
一一	一 ^ 一
With maximum response in ri . Finally, We feed this information to the Deconvnet-based method With
guided backpropagation from GrUn et al. (2016) to visualize the important features as defined by the
layer/filter pairs (p*, q*). Following the visualization method from Grun et al. (2016), given a filter P
from layer q and an input image, We first push forWard the input image through the netWork, storing
the activations from each filter at each layer, until reaching the layer p. Then, we backpropagate the
activations from filter q at layer p with inverse operations until reaching back to the input image space.
As result we get as part of the output a set of heatmaps, associated to the relevant features, defined
by (p* ,q*), indicating the influence of the pixels that contributed to the prediction. See Fig.1 (left)
for an example of the visual feedback provided by our method. Please refer to Grun et al. (2016);
Springenberg et al. (2015); Zeiler & Fergus (2014) for further details regarding Deconvnet-based and
Guided backpropagation methods.
3.3 Improving Visual Feedback Quality
Deep neural networks addressing computer vision tasks commonly push the input visual data through
a sequence of operations. A common trend of this sequential processing is that the input data is
internally resampled until reaching the desired prediction space. As mentioned in Sec. 2, methods
aiming at interpretation/explanation start from an internal point in the network and go backwards until
reaching the input space - producing a heatmap. However, due to the resampling process, heatmaps
generated by the backwards process tend to display grid-like artifacts. More precisely, we find that
this grid effect is caused by the internal resampling introduced by network operations with stride
larger than one (S>1). To alleviate this effect, in the backwards pass, we set the stride S=1 and
compensate for this change by modifying the input accordingly. As a result, the backwards process
can be executed while maintaining the network structure.
More formally, given a network operation block defined by a convolution mask with size [M ×M],
stride [S, S], and padding [O, O, O, O], the relationship between the size of its input [A×A] and its
output [B ×B] (see Fig. 3) is characterized by the following equation:
from where,
A + 2 ∙ O = M + (B - 1) ∙ S
B = [ (A + 2 ∙ O - M)/S ] + 1
(2)
(3)
Our method starts from the input ([Ad ×Ad]), which encodes the contributions from the input image,
carried by the higher layer in the Deconvnet backward pass. In order to enforce a “cleaner” resampling
when S>1, during the backward pass, the size of the input ([Ad×Ad]) of the operation block should
be the same as that of the feature map ([B×B]) produced by the forward pass if the stride S were
equal to one, i.e., A0d=B|S=1. According to Eq. 3 with S=1, Ad should therefore be resampled to
Ad=B|s=ι=A+2 ∙O一M+1. We do this resampling via the nearest-neighbor interpolation algorithm
given its proven fast computation time which makes it optimal for real-time processing. By introduc-
ing this step, the network will perform the backwards pass at every layer with stride S=1 and the grid
effect will disappear. See Fig. 2 for some examples of the improvements introduced by our method.
4	Evaluation
We conduct four sets of experiments. First, in Sec. 4.1, we verify the importance of the identified
relevant features in the task addressed by the network. Then, in Sec. 4.2, we evaluate the improvements
on visual quality provided by our method. In Sec. 4.3, we quantify the capability of our visual
explanations to highlight the regions that are descriptive for the classes of interest. Finally, in Sec. 4.4,
we assess the sensitivity of the proposed method w.r.t. the predicted classes.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
<
ImageNet-Cats	MNIST
Fashion 144k	ImageNet
■ All-selected
/ All-selected-random
■ onlyConv-selected
≡ onlyConv-selected-random
■ Original network
Figure 4: Changes in mean classification accuracy (mCA) as the identified relevant filters are ablated.
We evaluate the proposed method on an image recognition task. We conduct experiments on three
standard image recognition datasets, i.e., MNIST LeCun & Cortes (2010), Fashion144k Simo-Serra
et al. (2015) and imageNet (ILSVRC’12) Russakovsky et al. (2015). Additionally, we conduct
experiments on a subset of cat images from imageNet (imageNet-cats). MNIST covers 10 classes
of hand-written digits. It is composed by 70k images in total (60k for training/validation, 10k for
testing). The imageNet dataset is composed of 1k classes. Following the standard practice, we measure
performance on its validation set. Each class contains 50 validation images. For the Fashion144k
dataset Simo-Serra et al. (2015), we consider the subset of 12k images from Wang et al. (2018)
used for the geolocation of 12 city classes. The imageNet-cats subset consists of 13 cat classes,
containing both domestic and wild cats. It is composed of 17,550 images. Each class contains 1,3k
images for training and 50 images for testing. Please refer to the supplementary material for more
implementation details.
4.1	Importance of Identified Relevant Features
In this experiment, we verify the importance of the “relevant” features identified by our method at
training time (Sec. 3.1). To this end, given a set of identified features, we evaluate the influence they
have in the network by measuring changes in classification performance caused by their removal.
We remove features in the network by setting their corresponding layer/filter to zero. The expected
behavior is that a set of features with high relevance will produce a stronger drop in performance when
ablated. Fig. 4, shows the changes in classification performance for the tested datasets. We report
the performance of four sets of features: a) All, selected with our method by considering the whole
internal network architecture, b) OnlyConv, selected by considering only the convolutional layers
of the network, c) a Random selection of features (filters) selected from the layers indicated in the
sets a) and b), and for reference, d) the performance obtained by the original network. Note that the
OnlyConv method makes the assumption that relevant features are only present in the convolutional
layers. This is a similar assumption as the one made by state-of-the-art methods Bau et al. (2017);
Xie et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2016). When performing feature selection (Sec.3.1), we set the sparsity
parameter μ=10 for all the tested datasets. This produces subsets of 92∣101, 46∣28,104∣111, 2481180
relevant features for the All|OnlyConv methods, on the respective datasets from Fig. 4. Differences
in the number of the selected features can be attributed to possibly redundant or missing predictive
information between the initial pools of filter responses x used to select the All and OnlyConv features.
A quick inspection of Fig. 4 shows that indeed classification performance drops when we remove the
identified features, All and OnlyConv. Moreover, it is noticeable that a random removal of features
has a lower effect on classification accuracy. This demonstrates the relevance of the identified features
for the classes of interest. In addition, it is visible that the method that considers the complete internal
structure, i.e., All, suffers a stronger drop in performance compared to the OnlyConv which only
considers features produced by the convolutional layers. This suggests that there is indeed important
information encoded in the fully connected layers, and while convolutional layers are a good source
for features, focusing on them only does not reveal the full story. Regarding the effect of the sparsity
value μ in the μ-lasso formulation (Sec. 3.1), we note that increasing μ increases the number of
selected features. This leads to more specialized features that can better cope with rare instances of
the classes of interest. We decided to start from a relatively low value, e.g. μ=10, in order to focus
on a small set of relevant features that can generalize to the classes of interest while, at the same time,
keeping the computational cost low.
Qualitative Analysis. In order to get a qualitative insight into the type of information that these
features encode we compute an average visualization by considering the top 100 image patches
where such features have a high response. Towards this goal, given the set of identified relevant
features, for every class, we select images with higher responses. Then, we take the input image at
the location with maximum response for a given filter and crop it by considering the receptive field of
the corresponding layer/filter of interest. Selected examples of average images, with rich semantic
representation, are presented in Fig. 5 for the tested datasets.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Persian Siamese Egyptian	snow
tabby tiger cat cat cat cat cougar lynx leopard leopard jaguar lion tiger cheetah
MBOJ①N①6be-
Figure 5: Average Images from the identified relevant filters for the ImageNet-Cats subset (top), some selected
classes from the full ImageNet (left) and the Fashion144K (left) datasets, respectively.
L.A. London Madrid Melbourne Miami
Vancouver
Montreal Moscow Europe New York Paris Fran
*寸寸 TUowS(ΠLL.
Figure 6: Our visual explanations. We accompany the predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the
pixel locations, associated to the features, that contributed to the prediction. These features may come from the
object itself as well as from its context. See how for MNIST, some features support the existence of gaps, as
to avoid confusion with another class. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the
features come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).
We can notice that for imageNet-Cats, the identified features cover descriptive characteristics of the
considered cat classes. For example, the dark head of a Siamese cat, the nose/mouth of a cougar,
or the fluffy-white body shape of Persian cat. Likewise, it effectively identifies the descriptive fur
patterns from the jaguar, leopard and tiger classes and colors which are related to the background. We
see a similar effect on a selection of other objects from the rest of the imageNet dataset. For instance,
for scene-type classes, i.e., coast, castle and church, the identified features focus on the outline of such
scenes. Similarly, we notice different viewpoints for animal-type classes, e.g. golden-retriever, hen,
robin, magpie. On the Fashion144k dataset (Fig. 5 (right)) we can notice that some classes respond to
features related to green, blue, red, and beige colors. Some focus on legs, covered and uncovered,
while others focus on the upped body part. It is interesting that from the upper body parts, some
focus on persons with dark long hair, short hair, and light hair. Similarly, there is a class with high
response to horizontal black-white gradients where individuals tend to dress in dark clothes. These
visualizations answer the question explored in Wang et al. (2018) and why the computer outperforms
the surveyed participants. It shows that the model effectively exploits human-related features (legs
clothing, hair length/color, clothing color) as well as background-related features, mainly covered by
color/gradients and texture patterns. In the visual explanations provided by our method we can see
that the model effectively uses this type of features to reach its decision.
Finally, in Fig. 6 we show some examples of the visual explanations produced by our method. We
aggregate the predicted class label with our heatmap visualizations indicating the pixel locations,
associated to the relevant features, that contributed to the prediction. For the case of the ILSVRC’12
and Fashion144k examples, we notice that the relevant features come from the object itself as well as
from its context. For the case of the MNIST examples, in addition to the features firing on the object,
there are features that support the existence of a gap (background), as to emphasize that the object is
not filled there and avoid confusion with another class. For example, see for class 2 how it speaks
against 0 and for 6 how it goes against 4.
4.2	Visual Feedback Quality
In this section, we assess the visual quality of the visual explanations generated by our method. In
Fig. 7, we compare our visualizations with upsampled activation maps from internal layers (Bau et al.
(2017); Zhou et al. (2016)) and the output of DeconvNet with guided-backpropagation (Springenberg
et al. (2015)). We show these visualizations for different layers/filters throughout the network.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsam. Act.	16.1±1.30
Deconv+GB, Springenberg et al. (2015)	21.9±0.72
Grad-CAM, Das et al. (2016)	14.8±0.16
Guided Grad-CAM, Das et al. (2016)	19.4±0.34
Grad-CAM++, Chattopadhyay et al. (2018)	14.6±0.12
Guided Grad-CAM++, Chattopadhyay et al. (2018)	19.7±0.27
Ours	23.2±0.60
Figure 7: Pixel effect visualization for different methods. Note how for
lower layers (8/21), our method attenuates the grid-like artifacts introduced by Table 1: Area under the
Deconvnet methods. For higher layers (15/21), our method provides a more IoU curve (in percentages) on
precise visualization when compared to upsampled activation maps. For the an8Flower over 5-folds.
case of FC layers (20/21), using upsampled activation maps is not applicable.
Method	single-6c
Upsam. Act.	16.8±2.63
Deconv+GB, Springenberg et al. (2015)	21.3±0.77
Grad-CAM, Das et al. (2016)	17.5±0.25
Guided Grad-CAM, Das et al. (2016)	19.9±0.61
Grad-CAM++, Chattopadhyay et al. (2018)	15.6±0.57
Guided Grad-CAM++, Chattopadhyay et al. (2018)	19.6±0.65
Ours	22.5±0.82
Method	double-12c
an8Flower
examples GT masks
Generated explanations
imp. Grad CAM	GGalddCAM	Grad CAM++ GraGlUCded++	Ours.
Generated interpretations
featUres
Figure 8: Left: Examples and GT-masks from the proposed an8FLower dataset. Center: Comparison of
generated visual explanations. Right: Examples of the generated visual interpretations.
A quick inspection reveals that our method to attenuate the grid-like artifacts introduced by Deconvnet
methods (see Sec 3.3) indeed produces noticeable improvements for lower layers. See Fig. 2 for
additional examples presenting this difference at lower layers. Likewise, for the case of higher lay-
ers (Fig. 7), the proposed method provides more precise visualizations when compared to upsampled
activation maps. In fact, the rough output produced by the activation maps at higher layers has a
saliency-like behavior that gives the impression that the network is focusing on a larger region of
the image. This could be a possible attribution to why in earlier works Zhou et al. (2015), manual
inspection of network activations suggested that the network was focusing on “semantic” parts. Please
see Gonzalez-Garcia et al. (2017) for an in-depth discussion of this observation. Finally, for the case
of FC layers, using upsampled activation maps is not applicable. Please refer to the supplementary
material for additional examples. In addition, to quantitatively measure the quality of our heatmaps
we perform a box-occlusion study Zeiler & Fergus (2014). Given a specific heatmap, we occlude
the original image with patches sampled from the distribution defined by the heatmap. We measure
changes in performance as we gradually increase the number of patches up to covering the 30% most
relevant part of the image. Here our method reaches a mean difference in prediction confidence of
2% w.r.t. to Springenberg et al. (2015). This suggests that our method is able to maintain focus on
relevant class features while producing detailed heatmaps with better visual quality.
4.3	Measuring Visual Explanation Accuracy
We generate two synthetic datasets, an8Flower-single-6c and an8Flower-double-12c, with 6 and
12 classes respectively. In the former, a fixed single part of the object is allowed to change color.
This color defines the classes of interest. In the latter, a combination of color and the part on
which it is located defines the discriminative feature. After defining these features, we generate
masks that overlap with the discriminative regions (Fig. 8 (left)). Then, we threshold the heatmaps
at given values and measure the pixel-level intersection over union (IoU) of a model explanation
(produced by the method to be evaluated) w.r.t. these masks. We test a similar model as for the
MNIST dataset (Sec. 4.1) trained on each variant of the an8Flower dataset. In Table 1 we report
5-fold cross-validation performance of the proposed feature selection method using three different
means (Upsamp. Act. Maps, Deconv+GB Springenberg et al. (2015) and ours heatmap variant) and
other state-of-the-art methods to generate visual explanations.
We can notice in Fig. 8 (right) that our method effectively identifies the pre-defined discriminative
regions regardless of whether they are related to color and/or shape. Likewise, Fig. 8 (center) shows
that our explanations accurately highlight these features and that they have a better balance between
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 9: Sensitivity of the proposed method w.r.t. the predicted class. Note how the generated explanation
focuses on different regions of the input image (left) when explaining different classes. We see a similar trend on
explanations generated from the models trained on the imageNet (center) and imageNet-cats (right) datasets.
level of detail and coverage than those produced by existing methods. The quantitative results
(Table 1) show that our method has a higher mean IoU of the discriminative features when compared
to existing methods. However, it should be noted that, different from the compared methods, our
method involves an additional process, i.e., feature selection via μ-lasso, at training time. Moreover,
for this process an additional parameter, i.e μ, should be defined (Sec. 3.1). Please refer to the
supplementary material for more details and visualizations.
Methods for model explanation/interpretation aim at providing users with insights on what a model
has learned and why it makes specific predictions. Putting this together with the observations made
in our experiments, there are two points that should be noted. On the one hand, we believe that our
objective evaluation should be complemented with simpler user studies. This should ensure that
the produced explanations are meaningful to the individuals they aim to serve. On the other hand,
our proposed evaluation protocol enables objective quantitative comparison of different methods
for visual explanation. As such it is free of the weaknesses of exhaustive user studies and of the
complexities that can arise when replicating them.
4.4	Checking the Sanity of the Generated Visual Explanations
Beyond the capability of generating accurate visual explanations, recent works (Kindermans et al.
(2017); Julius Adebayo (2018); Nie et al. (2018)) have stressed the importance of verifying that the
generated explanations are indeed relevant to the model and the classes being explained. Towards this
goal, we run a similar experiment to that conducted in Nie et al. (2018) where the visual explanation
produced for a predicted class of a given model after observing a given image is compared against
those when a different class is considered when generating the explanation. A good explanation
should be sensible to the class, and thus generate different visualizations. In Fig. 9 we show qualitative
results obtained by running this experiment on our models trained on the ILSVRC’12 (Russakovsky
et al. (2015)) and imageNet-cats datasets.
As can be noted in Fig. 9, the explanation generated for the predicted class, i.e., ’cat’/’tabby’, focuses
on different regions than those generated for randomly selected classes. This is more remarkable for
the case of the imageNet-cats model, which can be considered a fine-grained classification task. In this
setting, when changing towards a random class, i.e., ’jaguar, panther, Panthera onca, Felis onca’, the
generated explanations only highlight the features that are common between the random class and
the ’tabby’ class depicted in the image. In their work, Nie et al. (2018) and Julius Adebayo (2018)
found that explanations from DeconvNet and Guided-Backpropagation methods are not performing
well in this respect, yielding visualizations that are not determined by the predicted class, but by the
filters of the first layer and the edge-like structures in the input images. Although our method relies
on DeconvNet and Guided-Backpropagation, our explanations go beyond regions with prominent
gradients - see Fig. 1, 6 & 8. In fact, in classes where color is a discriminative feature, uniform
regions are highlighted. This different result can be understood since, in our method, DeconvNet with
Guided-Backpropagation is merely used as a means to highlight the image regions that justify the
identified relevant features, not the predicted classes themselves. If a better, more robust or principled
visualization method is proposed in the future by the community, we could use that as well.
5	Conclusion
We propose a method to enrich the prediction made by DNNs by indicating the visual features
that contributed to such prediction. Our method identifies features encoded by the network that
are relevant for the task addressed by the DNN. It allows interpretation of these features by the
generation of average feature-wise visualizations. In addition, we proposed a method to attenuate
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
the artifacts introduced by strided operations in visualizations made by Deconvnet-based methods.
This empowers our method with richer visual feedback with pixel-level precision without requiring
additional annotations for supervision. Finally, we have proposed a novel dataset designed for the
objective evaluation of methods for explanation of DNNs.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the FWO SBO project Omnidrone, the VLAIO RD-project SPOTT , the KU
Leuven PDM Grant PDM/16/131, and a NVIDIA GPU grant.
References
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, GrCgoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Muller, and Woj-
ciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propaga-
tion. PLoS ONE, 10(7):e0130140, 07 2015.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection: Quantifying
interpretability of deep visual representations. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
K. Chatfield, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Return of the devil in the details: delving deep into
convolutional nets. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2014.
Aditya Chattopadhyay, Anirban Sarkar, Prantik Howlader, and Vineeth N. Balasubramanian. Grad-cam++:
Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional networks. In Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2018.
Abhishek Das, Harsh Agrawal, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Human Attention in Visual
Question Answering: Do Humans and Deep Networks Look at the Same Regions? In EMNLP, 2016.
Carl Doersch, Saurabh Singh, Abhinav Gupta, Josef Sivic, and Alexei A Efros. What makes paris look like
paris? Communications of the ACM, 58(12):103-110, 2015.
V. Escorcia, J. C. Niebles, and B. Ghanem. On the relationship between visual attributes and convolutional
networks. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
R. Fong and A. Vedaldi. Net2Vec: Quantifying and explaining how concepts are encoded by filters in deep
neural networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Abel Gonzalez-Garcia, Davide Modolo, and Vittorio Ferrari. Do semantic parts emerge in convolutional neural
networks? International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), pp. 1-19, 2017.
F. Grun, C. Rupprecht, N. Navab, and F. Tombari. A taxonomy and library for visualizing learned features in
convolutional neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Workshops, 2016.
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Marcus Rohrbach, Jeff Donahue, Bernt Schiele, and Trevor Darrell.
Generating visual explanations. In Bastian Leibe, Jiri Matas, Nicu Sebe, and Max Welling (eds.), European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016.
Ian Goodfellow Moritz Hardt Been Kim Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In
advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS), 2018.
A. Karpathy and L. Fei-Fei. Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descriptions. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 39(4):664-676, April 2017. ISSN 0162-8828.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2598339.
P.-J. Kindermans, S. Hooker, J. Adebayo, M. Alber, K. T. Schutt, S. Dahne, D. Erhan, and B. Kim. The
(Un)reliability of saliency methods. In NIPS workshop on Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning, 2017.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.lecun.
com/exdb/mnist/.
Julien Mairal, Francis Bach, and Jean Ponce. Sparse modeling for image and vision processing. Found. Trends.
Comput. Graph. Vis., 8(2-3):85-283, 2014.
Weili Nie, Yang Zhang, and Ankit Patel. A theoretical explanation for perplexing behaviors of backpropagation-
based visualizations. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML,
2018.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Jos6 Oramas M. and Tinne Tuytelaars. Modeling visual compatibility through hierarchical mid-level elements.
CoRR, abs/1604.00036, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.00036.
Konstantinos Rematas, Basura Fernando, Frank Dellaert, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Dataset fingerprints: Exploring
image collections through data mining. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej
Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211-252, 2015. doi:
10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv
Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In The IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
E. Simo-Serra, S. Fidler, F. Moreno-Noguer, and R. Urtasun. Neuroaesthetics in fashion: modeling the perception
of fashionability. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising
image classification models and saliency maps. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) Workshops, 2014.
J. T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. A. Riedmiller. Striving for simplicity: the all convolutional
net. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) Workshops, 2015.
E. van den Berg and M. P. Friedlander. Probing the pareto frontier for basis pursuit solutions. SIAM J. Sci.
Comput., 31(2):890-912, 2008.
A.	Vedaldi and K. Lenc. Matconvnet: Convolutional neural networks for matlab. In ACM international
conference on Multimedia (MM), 2015.
Kaili Wang, Yu-Hui Huang, Jos6 Oramas M, Luc Van Gool, and Tinne Tuytelaars. An analysis of human-centered
geolocation. Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2018.
Ning Xie, Md. Kamruzzaman Sarker, Derek Doran, Pascal Hitzler, and Michael Raymer. Relating input concepts
to convolutional neural network decisions. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) Workshops,
2017.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Anh Mai Nguyen, Thomas J. Fuchs, and Hod Lipson. Understanding neural networks
through deep visualization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Workshops, 2015.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014.
Jianming Zhang, Zhe Lin, Shen Xiaohui Brandt, Jonathan, and Stan Sclaroff. Top-down neural attention by
excitation backprop. In European Conference on Computer Vision(ECCV), 2016.
Quanshi Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Interpretable convolutional neural networks. In The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
B.	Zhou, A. Khosla, Lapedriza. A., A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. Learning Deep Features for Discriminative
Localization. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Object detectors emerge in
deep scene cnns. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
6 Supplementary Material
This section constitutes supplementary material. As such, this document is organized in six parts. In Section 6.1,
we provide implementation details of the proposed method and experiments presented in the original manuscript.
In Section 6.2, we provide a further quantitative analysis on the importance of the identified relevant features. In
Section 6.3, we provide additional details regarding the generation of an8Flower, a dataset specially designed for
evaluating methods for visual explanation. In Section 6.4, we provide extended examples on the average images
used for interpretation. Similarly, in Section 6.5, we provide additional examples of visual explanations provided
by our method. Finally, we concluded this document in Section 6.6 by performing a qualitative comparison in
order to display the advantages of the proposed method over existing work.
6.1	Implementation Details
We use in our experiments the pre-trained models provided as part of the MatconvNet framework Vedaldi &
Lenc (2015) for both the MNISTand ImageNet datasets. For the Fashion144k dataset we use the VGG-F -based
model (Finetunned with image-based pooling) released by the authors from Wang et al. (2018). For MNIST, we
employ a network composed by 8 layers in total, five of them are convolutional , two are fully connected. The
last one is a softmax layer. For the full imageNetset, we employ a VGG-F Chatfield et al. (2014) model which
is composed of 21 layers, from these 15 are convolutional followed by five fully connected. The last one is a
softmax layer. Finally, for the case of the imageNet-Cats subset we finetune the VGG-F model trained on the
full imageNetset.
6.2	Importance of the Identified Features
In order to verify the relevance of the identified features, i.e., how well the features encode information from the
classes of interest, we measure the level to which they are able to "reconstruct" each of the classes of interest.
Towards this goal, we compute the mean area under the ROC curve (mean-AUC) for all the classes of interest in a
given dataset. In Figure 10, We report performance over different μ values. It can be noted that already with a low
amount of selected features, i.e.. a low value of μ, we can already encode, properly, visual characteristics of the
classes of interest. This shows that the identified features hold strong potential as visual means for explanation.
Figure 10: Classification based on the identified relevant features. We present the mean area under
the ROC curve (mean-AUC) for all the classes of interest in a given dataset. Note that only a small
amount of features, i.e., low μ, is required to produce a good reconstruction.
6.3	an8Flower Dataset
We release an8Flower, a dataset and evaluation protocol specifically designed for evaluating the performance of
methods for model explanation. We generate this dataset by taking as starting point the eggplant model 2 publicly
released with the Anim8or 3 3D modeling software. Then, we introduce into this model the discriminative
features to define each of the classes of interest. For each class of interest, we rotate the object 360 degrees and
render/save 40 frames at different viewpoints with a size of 300x300 pixels.
Afterwards, in order to increase variation and the amount of data, we apply the following data augmentation
procedure on each image frame. For each of the original 300x300 rendered frames, we crop each image five
times at four corners and center respectively with the size of 250x250. Then, each cropped image is rotated five
angles: 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 degrees. In the end, the data augmentation produces a total of 1000 example images
2http://www.anim8or.com/learn/tutorials/eggplant/index.html
3http://www.anim8or.com/
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
an8flower-single-6c
an8flower-double-12c
Figure 11: Rendered images from three variant of the proposed an8Flower dataset. an8Flower-
single-6c contains six different flower colors, an8Flower-double-12c has six more classes, the same
six colors but focused on the stem part. an8Flower-part-2c consists of two classes defined by the
occurrence of balls on the flower or thorns on the stem part.
per class. Figure 11 shows rendered images of the classes of interest considered in three variants of this dataset,
i.e., an8Flower-single-6c, an8Flower-double-12c and an8Flower-part-2c. Figure 12 and Figure 13 displays
some examples of the augmented data used in training/testing and its corresponding mask.
6.4	Visual Interpretation
In this section, we provide extended examples of the average images used by our method as means for
visual interpretation (Section 4.1 of the original manuscript). Moreover, we provide a visual comparison
with their counterparts generated by existing methods. More precisely, up-scaled activations maps from
convolutional layers Bau et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2015) and heatmaps generated from deconvnets with guided
backpropagation Grun et al. (2016); SPringenberg et al. (2015); Zeiler & Fergus (2014).
In Figure 14, we show average images for the imageNet-Cats Russakovsky et al. (2015) subset, and the
Fashion144k Simo-Serra et al. (2015) datasets, respectively. For each class on each dataset, we show the average
image of each identified feature sorted, from top to bottom, based on their relevance for its corresponding
class. In a similar fashion, in Figure 15, we show a visualization for the displayed subset of classes (Figure 5
(center) in the original manuscript) from the imageNet dataset. Given that for the imageNet dataset most of the
identified features come from fully connected (FC) layers, no up-scaled response map visualization is possible
for them. Therefore, we opted not to display average visualizations based on up-scaled activation maps. Finally,
in Figure 16, we show average visualizations for additional classes from imageNet.
In Figure 14 we can notice that already within few top relevant features per class, semantic concepts start to
appear. In addition, we see the same trends observed in the original paper. On the one hand, some features encode
class-specific properties, e.g. nose shape, fur pattern, for the case of the imageNet-Cats, or hair color/length, leg
dressing, or clothing color for the case of Fashion 144k. On the other hand, some features encode properties
related to the background/context in which the images are captured, e.g. wall/road colors, vegetation, etc. We
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
elpmaxe ksam TG elpmaxe ksam TG
Figure 12: Random selection of examples from the an8Flower-part-2c with their corresponding
ground-truth masks.
can notice that for the case of up-sampled activation maps, there are identified features which originate in Fully
Connected Layers (FC). For this type of layer, the up-scaling process is not applicable.
When comparing the average visualizations generated by the different methods, it is noticeable that the proposed
method produces sharper visualizations than those generated from up-scaled activation maps. Moreover, our
visualizations are still sharper than those produced by state-of-the-art deconvnet-based methods with guided-
backpropagation Springenberg et al. (2015). Therefore, enhancing the interpretation capabilities of the proposed
method.
6.5	Visual Explanation
In Figures 17, 18, 19, 13, 12 we extend the visual explanation results presented in the original manuscript.
(Figures 1, 6, 7 and 9 in the original manuscript)
In the visual explanations generated by our method we accompany the predicted class label with our heatmaps
indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that contributed to the prediction. In line with the
original manuscript, on top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features come from.
6.6	Visual Quality Comparison
We conclude this document by providing extended results related to the visual quality comparison (Section 4.2
in the original manuscript) of the visualizations generated by our method. Towards this goal, in Figures 23-27
we compare our visualizations with upsampled activation maps from internal layers Bau et al. (2017); Zhou
et al. (2015) and the output of deconvnet combined with guided-backpropagation Springenberg et al. (2015).
Following the same methodology as in Figure 2 of the original manuscript, we focus on visualizations at lower
and higher layers of the network, i.e., layer-2/21 and layer-15/21, respectively.
For reference, in Figure 28 we show similar comparisons from explanations generated from models trained on
the proposed an8Flower dataset.
In Figures 23-27 we can corroborate that our method to attenuate the grid-like artifacts introduced by deconvnet
methods indeed produces noticeable improvements, for lower layers. Likewise, for the case of higher layers, the
proposed method provides a more precise visualization when compared to upsampled activation maps.
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
GT mask example GT mask example GT mask example GT mask example GT mask example GT mask example
Figure 13: Random selection of examples from the an8Flower-single-6c and an8Flower-double-12c
with their corresponding ground-truth masks
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
1
2
3
imageNet-cats
9
10
11
12
13


SiamUesepEgsypatianmp. Act. Masnowp


1
2
3

Persian SiamesDeEgeypticanonv + GB [5]


1
2
3
4







cougOar ulynxrsleopard


Fashion 144k - 12 cities
OO 7 654321。 987654 321
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
16
17
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Figure 14: Interpretation (Average) visualizations for the identified relevant features for the
imageNet-Cats Russakovsky et al. (2015) and a subset of the Fashion144k Simo-Serra et al. (2015)
dataset. For each class on each dataset, average features are sorted by decreasing relevance in the
class they encode. Average images are generated by either considering: up-scaled activation maps,
heatmaps from methods based on deconvnet with guided-backpropagation (deconv+GB) Springen-
berg et al. (2015), or our method.
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 15: Interpretation (Average) visualizations for the identified relevant features for a subset
of classes from the imageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015) dataset. Average images are generated
by either considering heatmaps from methods based on deconvnet with guided-backpropagation
(deconv+GB) Springenberg et al. (2015) (left) and our method (right).
Figure 16: Interpretation (Average) visualizations produced by our method for the identified relevant
features for the imageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015) dataset.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
4/8	3/8	4/8
V t V ⅞ ⅞ 4 V
6/8	4/8	6/8	6/8	6/8	6/8
2 2 2 吃 b b b ⅜
3/8	4/8	4/8	6/8	6/8	4/8
Z 9	小 35 5	5	5
f./l!	6/8	6/8	3/H	6/8	6/8
<5 6 6 制 N £ £ 2
3/8	4/8	6/8	3/8	6/8	6/8
IIdlX『打y
6/8	6/8	6/8	6/8	6/8	6/8
IrU 电■ O 6。©
Figure 17: Generated visual explanations from the MNIST dataset. We accompany the predicted
class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that contributed
to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features
come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 18: Generated visual explanations from the imageNet-Cats Russakovsky et al. (2015)
subset. We accompany the predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations,
associated to the features, that contributed to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the
number of the layer where the features come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional
(green) and fully connected (pink).
19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 19: Generated visual explanations from the Fashion144k dataset Simo-Serra et al. (2015). We
accompany the predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features,
that contributed to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features
come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).
20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 20: Generated visual explanations from our proposed An8Flower-single-6c dataset. We accompany
the predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that
contributed to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features
come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).

21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 21: Generated visual explanations from our proposed An8Flower-double-12c dataset. We accompany
the predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that
contributed to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features
come from. The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).



22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 22: Generated visual explanations from our proposed An8Flower-part-2c dataset. We accompany the
predicted class label with our heatmaps indicating the pixel locations, associated to the features, that contributed
to the prediction. On top of each heatmap we indicate the number of the layer where the features come from.
The layer type is color-coded, i.e., convolutional (green) and fully connected (pink).
23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsamp. Act. Map
Deconv + GB [5]
Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]
Ours

Figure 23: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the imageNet-Cats sub-
set Russakovsky et al. (2015). Note how our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts introduced by
deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more detailed
visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsamp. Act. Map
Deconv + GB [5]
Upsamp. Act. Map
Qeconv + GB [5]
Ours
Figure 24: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the imageNet-Cats sub-
set Russakovsky et al. (2015). Note how our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts introduced by
deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more detailed
visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
≡ryer(2∕21)
top 1--(15/21)
一。wsryer(2∕21)
top≡ryer(15∕21)
Figure 25: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the Fashion114k
dataset Simo-Serra et al. (2015). Note how our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts intro-
duced by deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more
detailed visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
-OS 1--(2/21)
top 1--(15/21)
26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Figure 26: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the Fashion114k
dataset Simo-Serra et al. (2015). Note how our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts intro-
duced by deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more
detailed visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours	Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]	Ours
Figure 27: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the Fashion114k
dataset Simo-Serra et al. (2015). Note how our heatmaps attenuate the grid-like artifacts intro-
duced by deconvnet-based methods at lower layers. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more
detailed visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Ours
Ours
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]
Upsamp. Act. Map Deconv + GB [5]
Figure 28: Visual quality comparison for visualizations generated from the an8Flower dataset.
The ground truth mask of the first three rows is stem, middle two rows are flowers while the last three
rows are balls (on flower), thorns (on stem) and both. Note how our heatmaps have a higher coverage
and stronger response in the ground truth mask area. Likewise, our method is able to produce a more
detailed visual feedback than upsampled activation maps.
29