Table 1: Mean and standard deviation (s.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds. PCL is a scaled-upimplementation of the method described by Hyvarinen and Morioka (2017), leveraging the encodingarchitecture and training hyperparameters specified in appendix E. Ada-GVAE is the leading methodproposed by Locatello et al. (2020). Bold indicates statistical significance above the next highestscore (independent T-test, p < 0.05). Red indicates statistical significance below the next lowestscore. Results for additional datasets and models are in Table 2 and Appendix G.
Table 2: Continuous ground-truth variabledatasets. See Table 1 for details.
Table 3: Glossary of terms. We use a * (i.e. g*) when necessary to highlight that We are referring tothe ground truth model.
Table 4: Natural Sprite Configs. Values in brackets refer to the number of unique values. Shapespresented are predefined in Spriteworld (Watters et al., 2019).
Table 5: MCC using linear correlation where L denotes the number of mixing layers.
Table 6: Shape parameters (α) of the fitted generalized Laplace distributions in Fig. 11.
Table 7: Empirical estimates of Kurtosis for mask transitions per metric for each dataset.
Table 8: Maximum likelihood scores for the considered distributions on ∆ area for each dataset.				dataset	N	genlaplace	normal	laplaceKITTI	82506	-8.72e+04	-1.20e+05	-9.25e+04YouTube	234652	-4.50e+05	-5.64e+05	-4.74e+05Table 9: Maximum likelihood scores for the considered distributions on ∆x for each dataset.
Table 9: Maximum likelihood scores for the considered distributions on ∆x for each dataset.
Table 10: Maximum likelihood scores for the considered distributions on ∆y for each dataset.
Table 11: Parameter fits for the considered distributions on ∆ area for each dataset. The parametersare (alpha, location, scale) for generalized Laplace/Normal, (location, scale) for the other twodistributions.
Table 12: Parameter fits for the considered distributions on ∆ x for each dataset. The parametersare (alpha, location, scale) for generalized Laplace/Normal, (location, scale) for the other twodistributions.
Table 13: Parameter fits for the considered distributions on ∆ y for each dataset. The parametersare (alpha, location, scale) for generalized Laplace/Normal, (location, scale) for the other twodistributions.
Table 14: Mean and standard deviation (s.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds. PM-VAE (γ)refers to replacing the Laplace prior with a KL-divergence term between the (Gaussian) posteriors attime-step t and time-step t - 1, with conditional prior regularization, γ.
Table 15: Continuous ground-truth variable datasets. See Table 14 for details.
Table 16: dSprites. Median and absolute deviation (a.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds (firstthree rows are from (Locatello et al., 2020)). The bottom three rows give mean and standard deviation(s.d.) for the models presented in this paper.
Table 17: Cars3D. Median and absolute deviation (a.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds (firstthree rows are from (Locatello et al., 2020)). The bottom three rows give mean and standard deviation(s.d.) for the models presented in this paper.
Table 18: SmallNORB. Median and absolute deviation (a.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds(first three rows are from (Locatello et al., 2020)). The bottom three rows give mean and standarddeviation (s.d.) for the models presented in this paper.
Table 19: Shapes3D. Median and absolute deviation (a.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds(first three rows are from (Locatello et al., 2020)). The bottom three rows give mean and standarddeviation (s.d.) for the models presented in this paper.
Table 20: MPI3D. Median and absolute deviation (a.d.) metric scores across 10 random seeds (firstthree rows are from (Locatello et al., 2020)). The bottom three rows give mean and standard deviation(s.d.) for comparison with other tables.
Table 21: Impact of removing natural dependence on Discrete Natural Sprites.
Table 22: Impact of removing natural dependence on Continuous Natural Sprites.
