Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
CrystalGAN: Learning to Discover Crystal-
lographic Structures with Generative Adver-
sarial Networks
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Ab stract
Our main motivation is to propose an efficient approach to generate novel multi-
element stable chemical compounds that can be used in real world applications.
This task can be formulated as a combinatorial problem, and it takes many hours
of human experts to construct, and to evaluate new data. Unsupervised learning
methods such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can be efficiently used
to produce new data. Cross-domain Generative Adversarial Networks were re-
ported to achieve exciting results in image processing applications. However, in
the domain of materials science, there is a need to synthesize data with higher
order complexity compared to observed samples, and the state-of-the-art cross-
domain GANs can not be adapted directly. In this contribution, we propose a
novel GAN called CrystalGAN which generates new chemically stable crystallo-
graphic structures with increased domain complexity. We introduce an original
architecture, we provide the corresponding loss functions, and we show that the
CrystalGAN generates very reasonable data. We illustrate the efficiency of the
proposed method on a real original problem of novel hydrides discovery that can
be further used in development of hydrogen storage materials.
1	Introduction
In modern society, abig variety of inorganic compositions are used for hydrogen storage owing to its
favorable cost (Crivello et al., 2016). A vast number of organic molecules are applied in solar cells,
organic light-emitting diodes, conductors, and sensors (Yang et al., 2017). Synthesis of new organic
and inorganic compounds is a challenge in physics, chemistry and in materials science. Design of
new structures aims to find the best solution in a big chemical space, and it is in fact a combinatorial
optimization problem.
In this work, we focus on applications of hydrogen storage, and in particular, we challenge the prob-
lem to investigate novel chemical compositions with stable crystals. Traditionally, density functional
theory (DFT) plays a central role in prediction of chemically relevant compositions with stable crys-
tals (Seko et al., 2018). However, the DFT calculations are computationally expensive, and it is not
acceptable to apply it to test all possible randomly generated structures.
A number of machine learning approaches were proposed to facilitate the search for novel sta-
ble compositions (Butler et al., 2018). There was an attempt to find new compositions using an
inorganic crystal structure database, and to estimate the probabilities of new candidates based on
compositional similarities. These methods to generate relevant chemical compositions are based on
recommender systems (Hu et al., 2008). The output of the recommender systems applied in the
crystallographic field is a rating or preference for a structure. A recent approach based on a combi-
nation of machine learning methods and the high-throughput DFT calculations allowed to explore
ternary chemical compounds (Schmidt et al., 2018), and it was shown that statistical methods can
be of a big help to identify stable structures, and that they do it much faster than standard methods.
Recently, support vector machines were tested to predict crystal structures (Oliynyk et al., 2017)
showing that the method can reliably predict the crystal structure given its composition. It is worth
mentioning that data representation of observations to be passed to a learner, is critical, and data
1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
representations which are the most suitable for learning algorithms, are not necessarily scientifically
intuitive (Swann et al., 2018).
Deep learning methods were reported to learn rich hierarchical models over all kind of data, and
the GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is a state-of-the-art model to synthesize data. Moreover, deep
networks were reported to learn transferable representations (Ren & Lee, 2017). The GANs were
already exploited with success in cross-domain learning applications for image processing (Zhu
et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Janz et al., 2017).
Our goal is to develop a competitive approach to identify stable ternary chemical compounds, i.e.,
compounds containing three different elements, from observations of binary compounds. Nowa-
days, there does not exist any approach that can be applied directly to such an important task of
materials science. The state-of-the-art GANs are limited in the sense that they do not generate sam-
ples in domains with increased complexity, e.g., the application where we aim to construct crystals
with three elements from observations containing two chemical elements only. An attempt to learn
many-to-many mappings was recently introduced by Almahairi et al. (2018), however, this promis-
ing approach does not allow to generate data of a higher-order dimension.
Our contribution is multi-fold:
•	To our knowledge, we are the first to introduce a GAN to solve the scientific problem of
discovery of novel crystal structures, and we introduce an original methodology to generate
new stable chemical compositions;
•	The proposed method is called CrystalGAN, and it consists of two cross-domain GAN
blocks with constraints integrating prior knowledge including a feature transfer step;
•	The proposed model generates data with increased complexity with respect to observed
samples;
•	We demonstrate by numerical experiments on a real challenge of chemistry and materials
science that our approach is competitive compared to existing methods;
•	The proposed algorithm is efficiently implemented in Python, and it will be publicly avail-
able shortly, as soon as the contribution is de-anonymized.
This paper is organized as follows. We discuss the related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we pro-
vide the formalisation of the problem, and introduce the CrystalGAN. The results of our numerical
experiments are discussed in Section 4. Concluding remarks and perspectives close the paper.
2	Related Work
Our contribution is closely related to the problems of unsupervised learning and cross-domain learn-
ing, since our aim is to synthesize novel data, and the new samples are supposed to belong to an
unobserved domain with an augmented complexity.
In the adversarial nets framework, the deep generative models compete with an adversary which is
a discriminative model learning to identify whether an observation comes from the model distribu-
tion or from the data distribution (Goodfellow, 2016). A classical GAN consists of two models, a
generator G whose objective is to synthesize data and a discriminator D whose aim is to distinguish
between real and generated data. The generator and the discriminator are trained simultaneously,
and the training problem is formulated as a two-player minimax game. A number of techniques to
improve training of GANs were proposed by Arjovsky et al. (2017); Gulrajani et al. (2017); Salimans
et al. (2016).
Learning cross domain relations is an active research direction in image processing. Several recent
papers (Zhu et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Almahairi et al., 2018) discuss an idea to capture some
particular characteristics of one image and to translate them into another image.
A conditional GAN for image-to-image translation is considered by Isola et al. (2017). An advantage
of the conditional model is that it allows to integrate underlying structure into the model. The
conditional GANs were also used for multi-model tasks (Mirza & Osindero, 2014). An idea to
combine observed data to produce new data was proposed in (Yazdani, 2017), e.g., an artist can mix
existing pieces of music to create a new one.
2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
AH: BH: GahBi : GbHAi : DAH and Dbh: AHBi: BHAi: AHBAi and BHABi : AHBg and BHAg:	First domain, H is hydrogen, and A is a metal Second domain, H is hydrogen, and B is another metal Generator function that translates input features XAH from (domain) AH to BH Generator function that translates input features XBH from (domain) BH to AH Discriminator functions of AH domain and BH domain, respectively xahbi is a sample generated by generator function Gahbi yBHA1 is a sample produced by generator function Gbhai Data reconstructed after two generator translations Data obtained after feature transfer step from domain AH to domain BH, and from domain BH to domain AH, respectively Input data for the second step of CrystalGAN
Gahb2 : Gbha2 : DAHB and Dbha: AHB2: BHA2: AHBA2 and BHAB2: AHB2 and BHA2:	Generator function that translates XAHBg Features generated in the first step from AHBg to AHB2 Generator function that translates yBHAg Data generated in first step from BHAg to BHA2 The discriminator functions of domain AHBg and domain BHAg, respectively XAHB2 is a sample generated by the generator function Gahb2 yBHA2 is a sample produced by the generator function Gbha2 Data reconstructed as a result of two generators translations Final new data (to be explored by human experts)
Table 1: Notations used in CrystalGAN.
An approach to learn high-level semantic features, and to train a model for more than a single task,
was introduced by Ren & Lee (2017). In particular, it was proposed to train a model to jointly
learn several complementary tasks. This method is expected to overcome the problem of overfitting
to a single task. An idea to introduce multiple discriminators whose role varies from formidable
adversary to forgiving teacher was discussed by Durugkar et al. (2017).
Several GANs were adapted to some materials science and chemical applications. So, Objective-
Reinforced GANs that perform molecular generation of carbon-chain sequence taking into consider-
ation some desired properties, were introduced in (Sanchez-Lengeling et al., 2017), and the method
was shown to be efficient for drug discovery. Another avenue is to integrate rule-based knowledge,
e.g., molecular descriptors with the deep learning. ChemNet (Goh et al., 2017) is a deep neural
network pre-trained with chemistry-relevant representations obtained from prior knowledge. The
model can be used to predict new chemical properties. However, as we have already mentioned
before, none of these methods generates crystal data of augmented complexity.
3	CrystalGAN: an Approach to Generate Stable Ternary
Chemical Compounds
In this section, we introduce our approach. The CrystalGAN consists of three procedures:
1.	First step GAN which is closely related to the cross-domain GANs, and that generates
pseudo-binary samples where the domains are mixed.
2.	Feature transfer procedure constructs higher order complexity data from the samples gen-
erated at the previous step, and where components from all domains are well-separated.
3.	Second step GAN synthesizes, under geometric constraints, novel ternary stable chemical
structures.
First, we describe a cross-domain GAN, and then, we provide all the details on the proposed Crys-
talGAN. We provide all notations used by the CrystalGAN in Table 1. The GANs architectures for
the first and the second steps are shown on Figure 1.
3.1	Problem Formulation for Applications with Augmented Complexity
We now propose a novel architecture based on the cross-domain GAN algorithms with constraint
learning to discover higher order complexity crystallographic systems. We introduce a GAN model
to find relations between different crystallographic domains, and to generate new materials.
3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
(a) First step of CrystalGAN.
di < d(H,H,) < d2
dι < d(A,B) < d2
dι < d(A<') < d2
di < d(β,ff) < d2
(b) Second step of CrystalGAN
Figure 1: The CrystalGAN architecture.
To make the paper easier to follow, without loss of generality, we will present our method providing
a specific example of generating ternary hydride compounds of the form ”A (a metal) - H (hydrogen)
- B (a metal)”.
Our observations are stable binary compounds containing chemical elements A+H which is a com-
position of some metal A and the hydrogen H, and B+H which is a mixture of another metal B
with the hydrogen. So, a machine learning algorithm has access to observations {(xAHi)}iN=A1H and
{(yBHi)}iN=B1H . Our goal is to generate novel ternary, i.e. more complex, stable data xAHB (or
yBHA) based on the properties learned from the observed binary structures.
Below we describe the architecture of the CrystalGAN.
3.2 Steps of CrystalGAN
Our approach consists of two consecutive steps with a feature transfer procedure inbetween.
3.2. 1 First Step
The first step of CrystalGAN generates new data with increased complexity. The adversarial network
takes {(xAHi)}iN=A1H and {(yBHi)}iN=B1H, and synthesizes
xAHB1 = GAHB1 (xAH), xAHBA1 = GBHA1 (xAHB1) = GBHA1 ◦ GAHB1 (xAH),	(1)
and
yBHA1 = GBHA1 (yBH), yBHAB1 = GAHB1 (yBHA1) = GAHB1 ◦ GBHA1 (yBH).	(2)
Figure 1a summarizes the first step of CrystalGAN.
The reconstruction loss functions take the following form:
LRAH =d(xAHBA1, xAH) = d(GBHA1 ◦ GAHB1(xAH),xAH),	(3)
LRBH =d(yBHAB1, yBH) = d(GAHB1 ◦ GBHA1(yBH),yBH).	(4)
Ideally, LRAH = 0, LRBH = 0, and xAHBA1 = xAH , yBHAB1 = yBH, and we minimize the
distances d(xAHBA1,xAH) and d(yBHAB1, yBH).
The generative adversarial loss functions of the first step of CrystalGAN aim to control that the
original observations are reconstructed as accurate as possible:
LGANBH = -ExAH〜PAH [lθg(DBH(GAHBI (XAH)))],	(5)
4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
and
LGANAH = -EyBH〜PBH [log(DAH(GBHAI (yBH)))].	(6)
The generative loss functions contain the two terms defined above:
LGAHB1 = LGANBH + LRAH , LGBHA1 = LGANAH + LRBH .	(7)
The discriminative loss functions aim to discriminate the samples coming from AH and BH:
LDBH = -EyBH~PBH [log(DBH(yBH))] - Exah~Pah [log(I - DBH(GAHBI (XAH)))], (8)
LDAH = -ExAH〜PAH [log(DAH(XAH))]- EyBH~PBH [log(1 - DAH(GBHA1 (yBH)))]. (9)
Now, we have all elements to define the full generative loss function of the first step:
LG1 = LGAHB1 + LGBHA1 = λ1LGANBH + λ2LRAH + λ3LGANAH + λ4LRBH,	(10)
where λ1, λ2, λ3, and λ4 are real-valued hyper-parameters that control the ratio between the corre-
sponding terms, and the hyper-parameters are to be fixed by cross-validation.
The full discriminator loss function of this step LD1 is defined as follows:
LD1 = LDAH +LDBH.	(11)
3.2.2	Feature Transfer
The first step generates pseudo-binary samples MH, where M is a new discovered domain merging
A and B properties. Although these results can be interesting for human experts, the samples gen-
erated by the first step are not easy to interpret, since the domains A and B are completely mixed in
these samples, and there is no way to deduce characteristics of two separate elements coming from
these domains.
So, we need a second step which will generate data of a higher order complexity from two given
domains. We transfer the attributes of A and B elements, this procedure is also shown on Figure 1a,
in order to construct a new dataset that will be used as a training set in the second step of the
CrystalGAN.
In order to prepare the datasets to generate higher order complexity samples, we add a placeholder.
(E.g., for domain AH, the fourth matrix is empty, and for domain BH, the third matrix is empty.)
3.2.3	Second Step of the CrystalGAN
The second step GAN takes as input the data generated by the first step GAN and modified by the
feature transfer procedure. The results of the second step are samples which describe ternary chem-
ical compounds that are supposed to be stable from chemical viewpoint. The geometric constraints
control the quality of generated data.
A crystallographic structure is fully described by a local distribution. This distribution is deter-
mined by distances to all nearest neighbors of each atom in a given crystallographic structure. We
enforce the second step GAN with the following geometric constraints which satisfy the geometric
conditions of our scientific domain application. The implemented constraints are also shown on
Figure 1b.
Let {si}im=1 be the set of distances of the first neighbors of all atoms in a crystallographic structure.
There are two geometric constraints to be considered while generating new data.
The first geometric (geo) constraint is defined as follows:
1m
LgeoI = f (d1, s1,…，Sm) =	): . min k di - Si ∣∣2,	(12)
m i=1 i∈[1,m]
where d1 is the minimal distance between two first nearest neighbors in a given crystallographic
structure.
5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
The second geometric constraint takes the following form:
Lgeo2 = f(d2, s1,
1m
Sm) =-----m m min k d2 - Si k2,
m	i∈[1,m]
i=1
(13)
where d2 is the maximal distance between two first nearest neighbors.
The loss function of the second step GAN is augmented by the following geometric constraints:
Lgeo
o2 .
(14)
Given xAHBg and yBHAg from the previous step, we generate:
xAHB2 = GAHB2 (xAHBg), xAHBA2 = GBHA2 (xAHB2) = GBHA2 ◦ GAHB2 (xAHBg),	(15)
yBHA2 = GBHA2 (yBHAg), yBHAB2 = GAHB2 (yBHA2) = GAHB2 ◦ GBHA2 (yBHAg).	(16)
The reconstruction loss functions are given:
LRAHB = d(xAHBA2, xAHBg) = d(GBHA2 ◦ GAHB2 (xAHBg), xAHBg),	(17)
LRBHA = d(yBHAB2, yBHAg) = d(GAHB2 ◦ GBHA2 (yBHAg), yB HAg).	(18)
The generative adversarial loss functions are given by:
LGANBHAg = -ExAHBg ,~Pahb^ [log(DBHA(GAHB2 (xAHBg)))]	(19)
LGANAHBg = -EyBHAg ~PBHAg [log(DAHB(GBHA2(yBHAg)))]	(20)
The generative loss functions of the this step are defined as follows:
LGAHB2 = LGANBHAg + LR
AHB ,	(21)
LGBHA2 = LGANAHBg + LR
BHA.	(22)
The losses of the discriminator of the second step can be defined:
LDBHA = - EyBHAg 〜Pbha, g [log(DBHA(yBHAg))]-	(23)
ExAHBg 〜PAHBg [log(I- DBHA(GAHB2 (XAHBg )))],	(24)
LDAHB =-ExAHBg 〜PAHBg [log(DAHB (xAHBg))]-	(25)
E^yBHAg-PBHAg [log(I- DAHB (GBHA2(yBHAg)))].	(26)
Now, we have all elements to define the full generative loss function:
LG2 = LGAHB2 + LGBHA2 +Lgeo=	(27)
λ1LGANBHAg + λ2LRAHB + λ3LGANAHBg +λ4LRBHA + λ5Lgeo1 + λ6Lgeo2,	(28)
where λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, λ5, and λ6 are real-valued hyper-parameters that control the influence of the
terms.
The full discriminative loss function of the second step LD2 takes the form:
LD2 = LDAHB + LDBHA .	(29)
To summarise, in the second step, we use the dataset issued from the feature transfer as an input con-
taining two domains xAHBg and yBHAg. We train the cross-domain GAN taking into consideration
constraints of the crystallographic environment. We integrated geometric constraints proposed by
crystallographic and materials science experts to satisfy environmental constraints, and to increase
the rate of synthesized stable ternary compounds. The second step is drafted on Figure 1b.
6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
POSCAR
Direct
0.50000
0.50000
0.OOQOQ
0.00000
0.00000
0.00000
0.50000
0.50000
0.00000 0.00000ɔ
0.50000 0.50000 I ɪɪ
0.00000 0.50000 Γ ɪɪ
0.50000 0.00000J
0.00000	0.0000。1
0.50000 0.50000 ŋ ,
o.oαooo o.5oαoo 卜 ∕jβ
0.50000 0.00000J
3x3 4x3 4x3
回 d HIM
Figure 2: On the left: an example of a POSCAR file describing the composition of Palladium and
Hydrogen, and the data representation in the CrystalGAN. On the right: a 3-dimensional represen-
tation.
4	Experiments
4.1	Task Description: Exploring Novel Hydrides
Crystallographic structures can be represented using the POSCAR files which are input files for the
DFT calculations under the VASP code (Kresse & Joubert, 1999). These are coordinate files, they
contain the lattice geometry and the atomic positions, as well as the number (or the composition)
and the nature of atoms in the crystal unit cell.
We use a dataset constructed from (Bourgeois et al., 2017; Villars & Cenzual, 2017) by experts in
materials science. Our training data set contains the POSCAR files, and the proposed CrystalGAN
generates also POSCAR files. Such a file contains three matrices: the first one is abc matrix, corre-
sponding to the three lattice vectors defining the unit cell of the system, the second matrix contains
atomic positions of H atom, and the third matrix contains coordinates of metallic atom A (or B).
The information from the files is fed into 4-dimensional tensors. An example of a POSCAR file,
and its corresponding representation for the GANs is shown on Figure 2. On the same figure on the
right we show the corresponding structure in 3D. Note that we increase the data complexity by the
feature transfer procedure by adding placeholders.
Our training dataset includes 1,416 POSCAR files of binary hydrides divided into 63 classes where
each class is represented as a 4-dimensional tensor. Each class of binary MH hydride contains two
elements: the hydrogen H and another element M from the periodic table.
In our experiments, after discussions with materials science researchers, we focused on exploration
of ternary compositions ”Palladium - Hydrogen - Nickel” from the binary systems observations
of ”Palladium - Hydrogen” and ”Nickel - Hydrogen”. So, AH = PdH, and BH = NiH. We also
considered another task to generate ternary compounds ”Magnesium - Hydrogen - Titanium”.
In the CrystalGAN, we need to compute all the distances of the nearest neighbors for each generated
POSCAR file. The distances between hydrogen atoms H in a given crystallographic structure should
respect some geometric rules, as well as the distances between the atoms A-B, A-A’, and B-B0.
We applied the geometric constraints on the distances between the neighbors (for each atom in a
crystallographic structure) introduced in the previous section. Note that the distances A-H and
B-H are not penalized by the constraints.
4.2	Implementation Details
In order to compute the distances between all nearest neighbors in the generated data, we used the
pythonic library Pymatgen (Ong et al., 2012) specifically developed for material analysis.
For all experiments in this paper, the distances are fixed by our colleagues in crystallographic and
materials science to d1 = 1.8 A (angstrom, 10-10 meter) and d2 = 3 A. We set all the hyper-
parameters by cross validation, however, we found that a reasonable performance is reached when
all λi have similar values, and are quite close to 1. We use the standard AdamOptimizer with
learning rate α = 0.0001, and β1 = 0.5. The number of epochs is set to 1000 (we verified that the
functions converge). The mini-batch size equals 35.
7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Composition	GAN (standard)	DiscoGAN	CrystalGAN without constraints	CrystalGAN with constraints
Pd-Ni-H	0	0	4	9
Mg-Ti-H-	0	0	2	8
Table 2: Number of ternary compositions of good quality generated by the tested methods.
Each block of the CrystalGAN architecture (the generators and the discriminators) is a multi-layer
neural network with 5 hidden layers. Each layer contains 100 units. We use the rectified linear
unit (ReLU) as an activation function of the neural network. All these parameters were fixed by
cross-validation (for both chosen domains ”Palladium - Hydrogen” and ”Nickel - Hydrogen”).
Our code is implemented in Python (TensorFlow). We run the experiments using GPU with graphics
card NVIDIA Quadro M5000.
4.3	Results of Numerical Experiments and Discussion
In our numerical experiments, we compare the proposed CrystalGAN with a classical GAN, the
DiscoGAN (Kim et al., 2017), and the CrystalGAN but without the geometric constraints. All these
GANs generate POSCAR files, and we evaluate the performance of the models by the number of gen-
erated ternary structures which satisfy the geometric crystallographic environment. Table 2 shows
the number of successes for the considered methods. The classical GAN which takes Gaussian noise
as an input, does not generate acceptable chemical structures. The DiscoGAN approach performs
quite well if we use it to generate novel pseudo-binary structures, however, it is not adapted to syn-
thesize ternary compositions. We observed that the CrystalGAN (with the geometric constraints)
outperforms all tested methods.
From multiple discussions with experts in materials science and chemistry, first, we know that the
number of novel stable compounds can not be very high, and it is already considered as a success
if we synthesize several stable structures which satisfy the constraints. Hence, we can not really
reason in terms of accuracy or error rate which are widely used metrics in machine learning and data
mining.
Second, evaluation of a stable structure is not straightforward. Given a new composition, only
the result of density functional theory (DFT) calculations can provide a conclusion whether this
composition is stable enough, and whether it can be used in practice. However, the DFT calculations
are computationally too expensive, and it is out of question to run them on all data we generated
using the CrystalGAN. It is planned to run the DFT calculations on some pre-selected generated
ternary compositions to take a final decision on practical utility of the chemical compounds.
5	Conclusions
Our goal was to develop a principled approach to generate new ternary stable crystallographic struc-
tures from observed binary, i.e. containing two chemical elements only. We propose a learning
method called CrystalGAN to discover cross-domain relations in real data, and to generate novel
structures. The proposed approach can efficiently integrate, in form of constraints, prior knowledge
provided by human experts.
CrystalGAN is the first GAN developed to generate scientific data in the field of materials science.
To our knowledge, it is also the first approach which generates data of a higher-order complexity,
i.e., ternary structures where the domains are well-separated from observed binary compounds. The
CrystalGAN was, in particular, successfully tested to tackle the challenge to discover new materials
for hydrogen storage.
Currently, we investigate different GANs architectures, also including elements of reinforcement
learning, to produce data even of a higher complexity, e.g., compounds containing four or five
chemical elements. Note that although the CrystalGAN was developed and tested for applications in
materials science, it is a general method where the constraints can be easily adapted to any scientific
problem.
8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
References
A. Almahairi, S. Rajeshwar, A. Sordoni, P. Bachman, and A. Courville. Augmented cycleGAN:
Learning many-to-many mappings from unpaired data. In ICML, 2018.
Martin Arjovsky, SoUmith Chintala, and Leon Bottou. Wasserstein GAN. arXiv:170L07875, 2017.
N. Bourgeois, J.-C. Crivello, P. Cenedese, and J.-M. Joubert. Systematic first-principles study
of binary metal hydrides. ACS Combinatorial Science,19(8):513-523, 2017. doi: 10.1021/
acscombsci.7b00050.
K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev, and A. Walsh. Machine learning for molecular
and materials science. Nature, 559, 2018.
J.-C. Crivello, B. Dam, R. V. Denys, M. Dornheim, D. M. Grant, J. Huot, T. R. Jensen, P. de Jongh,
M. Latroche, C. Milanese, D. Milcius, G. S. Walker, C. J. Webb, C. Zlotea, and V. A. Yartys.
Review of magnesium hydride-based materials: development and optimisation. Applied Physics
A, 2016.
Ishan Durugkar, Ian Gemp, and Sridhar Mahadevan. Generative Multi-Adversarial Networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Garrett B. Goh, Charles Siegel, Abhinav Vishnu, and Nathan Hodas. ChemNet: A Transferable and
Generalizable Deep Neural Network for Small-molecule Property Prediction. In NIPS Workshop
on Machine Learning for Molecules and Materials, 2017.
Ian Goodfellow. NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks. arxiv:1701.00160, 2016.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 27 (NIPS), 2014.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Im-
proved Training of Wasserstein GANs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30 (NIPS), 2017.
Y. Hu, Y. Koren, and C. Volinsky. Collaborative Filtering for Implicit Feedback Datasets. In ICDM,
2008.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros. Image-to-Image Translation with
Conditional Adversarial Networks. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017
IEEE Conference on, 2017.
David Janz, Jos van der Westhuizen, Brooks Paige, Matt J. Kusner, and Jose, Miguel Hernandez-
Lobato. Learning a Generative Model for Validity in Complex Discrete Structures. In NIPS
Workshop on Machine Learning for Molecules and Materials, 2017.
Taeksoo Kim, Moonsu Cha, Hyunsoo Kim, Jung Kwon Lee, and Jiwon Kim. Learning to Discover
Cross-Domain Relations with Generative Adversarial Networks. In Proceedings of the 34th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
G. Kresse and D. Joubert. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method.
Physical Review B, 1999.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets. arXiv:1411.1784,
2014.
Anton O. Oliynyk, Lawrence A. Adutwum, Brent W. Rudyk, Harshil Pisavadia, Sogol Lotfi, Viktor
Hlukhyy, James J. Harynuk, Arthur Mar, and Jakoah Brgoch. Disentangling Structural Confu-
sion through Machine Learning: Structure Prediction and Polymorphism of Equiatomic Ternary
Phases ABC. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2017.
9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Shyue Ping Ong, William Davidson Richards, Anubhav Jain, Geoffroy Hautier, Michael Kocher,
Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, Vincent L. Chevrier, Kristin A. Persson, and Gerbrand Ceder. Python
Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis.
Computational Materials Science 68 (2013) 314319, 2012.
Z. Ren and Y. J. Lee. Cross-domain self-supervised multi-task feature learning using synthetic
imagery. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09082, 2017.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
Improved Techniques for Training GANs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
29 (NIPS), 2016.
Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling, Carlos OUteiraL Gabriel L. Guimaraes, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik.
Optimizing distributions over molecular space. An Objective-Reinforced Generative Adversar-
ial Network for Inverse-design Chemistry (ORGANIC). Preprint: chemrxiv:5309668, 2017.
Jonathan Schmidt, Liming Chen, Silvana Botti, and Miguel A. L. Marques. Predicting the stability of
ternary intermetallics with density functional theory and machine learning. Journal of Chemical
Physics 148, 241728 (2018), 2018.
Atsuto Seko, Hiroyuki Hayashi, Hisashi Kashima, and Isao Tanaka. Matrix- and tensor-based rec-
ommender systems for the discovery of currently unknown inorganic compounds. Phys. Rev.
Materials 2, 013805, 2018.
E. Swann, B. Sun, D. M. Cleland, and A.S. Barnard. Representing molecular and materials data for
unsupervised machine learning. Molecular simulation, 2018.
P. Villars and K. Cenzual (eds.). Pearson’s Crystal Data Crystal Structure Database for Inorganic
Compounds. ASM International, 2017.
X. Yang, J. Zhang, K. Yoshizoe, K. Terayama, and K. Tsuda. ChemTS: an efficient Python library
for de novo molecular generation. Communications in materials informatics, 2017.
Mehrdad Yazdani. RemixNet: Generative Adversarial Networks for Mixing Multiple Inputs. In
Semantic Computing (ICSC), 2017.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Unpaired Image-to-Image Trans-
lation using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks. In Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017 IEEE
International Conference on, 2017.
10