Figure 1: The first two histograms plot the distributions with the 95% confidence interval of thenon-topic and topic word scores for the three well-trained models, Attn-FC, Attn-TC and Attn-TL byrepeating the experiments five times. Likewise, the next two plot the ones of the embedding norms.
Figure 2: For Attn-FC, Attn-TC and Attn-TL, the graphs in order respectively plot the SEN relation-ship of a randomly picked topic word along with the theoretical predication derived in Corollary 1.
Figure 3: The changes of the SEN and the training loss for Attn-TC, Attn-TC-KF and Attn-TC-EF.
Figure 4: The SEN relationship in the training process of Attn-FC (left two columns) and Attn-TC(right two columns) on SST2 (upper row) and SST5 (lower row). The words, picked among the oneshaving the largest five scores, have the SEN curves that agree with their theoretical counterparts.
Figure 5: The juxtaposition of powerful and best during the training of Attn-FC (the first row)and Attn-TC (the second row). In each row, the first two graphs are the empirical and the theoreticalSEN curves of words powerful and best. The next two plot their SEN as a function of thenumber of epochs. The last shows the changes of their weights in a sentence that they co-occur.
Figure 6: The average topic purity (red) and number of occurrence (blue) of the words attended to inthe sentences containing w as the training of Attn-FC (first row) and Attn-TC (second row) proceeds.
Figure 7: The average topic purity (red) and number of occurrence (blue) of the words attended to inall the training sentences as the training of Attn-FC (left) and Attn-TC (right) proceeds.
Figure 8:	The first two histograms plot the distributions of the non-topic and topic word pair scoresalong with their 95% confidence intervals for the well-trained Attn-TC-CNN. Likewise, the next twoplot the ones of the centered embedding norms.
Figure 9:	The empirical and theoretical SEN curves of a randomly picked topic word pair for modelAttn-TC-CNN.
Figure 10:	The empirical and the theoretical SEN curves of a randomly picked topic word for Attn-FC (first row), Attn-TC (second row) and Attn-TL (third row) with a trainable query. The query isinitialized by a normal distribution N(0, σ2). From left to right, σ2 = 0.1, 0.5, 1 and 2, respectively.
