Figure 1: Learning the shape space of ShapeNet (Chang et al., 2015) cars directly from raw datausing SALD. Note the interior details; top row depicts SALD reconstructions of train data, andbottom row SALD reconstructions of test data.
Figure 2: Sign agnostic learning of an unsigned distance function to an L shape (left). Red colorsdepict positive values, and blue-green colors depict negative values. In the middle, the result ofoptimizing the SALD loss (equation 6); on the right, the result of SAL loss (equation 3). Note thatSALD better preserves sharp features of the shape and the isolevels.
Figure 3: Minimal surfaceproperty in 2D.
Figure 4: Minimal surface property: using SALD (middle) and SAL (right) with the input unsigneddistance function of a curve with a missing part (left) leads to a solution (black line, middle andright) with approximately minimal length in the missing part area. Note that the SALD solution alsopreserves sharp features of the original shape, better than SAL.
Figure 5: AD versus VAE.
Figure 6: ShapeNet qualitative test results. Each quadruple shows (columns from left to right):ground truth model, SAL-reconstruction, DeepSDF reconstruction, SALD reconstruction.
Figure 7: ShapeNet latent interpolation. In each group, the leftmost and rightmost columns are testexamples reconstructions; latent space generated shapes are coloured in yellow.
Figure 8: D-Faust qualitative results on test examples. Each quadruple shows (columns from left toright): raw scans (magenta depict back-faces), IGR, SALD, and SAL.
Figure 9: D-Faust latent interpolation. In each group, the leftmost and rightmost columns are testscans reconstructions; latent space generated shapes are coloured in yellow.
Figure 10: Sample complexity experiment: SALD (bottom row) shows better shape approximationthan SAL (top row), especially for small sample sets; numbers indicate sample sizes.
Figure 11: Failure cases.
Figure A1: 2D reconstruction additional results.
Figure A2: Timings (left) and network memory footprint (right), reported on various sample size.
Figure A3: Latent reconstruction sample complexity experiment: Chamfer distance to the input, asa function of the sample size. Note the Chamfer distance of the latent reconstruction is oblivious tosample size.
Figure A4: Latent reconstruction sample complexity experiment: SAL is left, SALD is right. Notethe latent reconstruction is oblivious to sample size.
