Figure 1: FFHQ dataset projected to the spacespanned by two keys φ1 and φ2 . We develop suf-ficient conditions for model attribution: Perturb-ing the authentic dataset along different keys withmutual angles larger than a data-dependent thresh-old guarantees attributability of the perturbed dis-tributions. (a) A threshold of 90 deg suffices forbenchmark datasets (MNIST, CelebA, FFHQ). (b)Smaller angles may not guarantee attributability.
Figure 2: (a) Validation of Theorem 1: All points should be close to the diagonal line or to itsright. (b) Support for orthogonal keys: Min. RHS value of Eq.(7) for all keys are either positive(MNIST) or close to zero (CelebA). (c,d) Statistics of μ and Σ for two sample user-end models forMNIST and CelebA. Small μ and small diag(Σ) suggest good match of Gφ to the perturbed datadistributions. (e-h) Distinguishability, attributability, perturbation length, and orthogonality of 100StyleGAN user-end models on FFHQ and 100 DCGAN user-end models on MNIST or CelebA,respectively.
Figure 3: Visualization of sample keys (1st row) and the corresponding user-end generated contents.
Figure 4: Capacity of keys as asphere packing problem: The fea-sible space (arc) is determined bythe data compliance and genera-tion quality constraints, and thesize of spheres by the minimal an-gle between keys.
Figure 5: Samples from user-end models with robust and non-robust training. For each subfigure -top: DCGAN on MNIST and CelebA; bottom: PGAN (CelebA) and CycleGAN (Cityscapes). Foreach dataset - top: samples from G0 (after worst-case post-process in (b-f)); mid: samples fromGφ (after robust training in (b-f)); btm (a): difference between non-robust Gφ and G0 ; btm (b-h)difference between robust and non-robust Gφ .
Figure 6: MNIST, CelebA, and FFHQ examples from Gφs with (a-c) small dmax and (d-f) largedmax . All models are distinguishable and attributable. (Zooming in on pdf file is recommended.)resembling random noise. Based on this finding, we test the hypothesis that keys more aligned withthe eigenspace of the small eigenvalues will have smaller dmax . We test this hypothesis by com-puting the Pearson correlations between dmax and φTMφ using 100 models for each of MNISTand CelebA. The resultant correlations are 0.33 and 0.53, respectively. In addition, we compareoutputs from models using the largest and the smallest eigenvectors of M as the keys in Fig. 7b.
Figure 7: (a) Eigenvectors for the two largest and two smallest eigenvalues of M for DCGANS onMNIST (top) and CelebA (bottom). (b) Left column: Samples from G0 ; Rest: G0 - Gφ where φare the eigenvectors in (a).
