Figure 1: FCDD explanation heatmaps for MVTec-AD (Bergmann et al., 2019). Rows from topto bottom show: (1) nominal samples (2) anomalous samples (3) FCDD anomaly heatmaps (4)ground-truth anomaly maps.
Figure 2: Visualization of a 3×3 convolution followedby a 3×3 transPosed convolution with a Gaussian kernel,both using a stride of 2.
Figure 3: Visualization of the overall procedure to produce full-resolution anomaly heatmaps withFCDD. X denotes the input, φ the network, A the produced anomaly heatmap and A0 the upsampledversion of A using a transposed Gaussian convolution.
Figure 4: Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples of a Fashion-MNIST model trained onnominal class “trousers” (nominal samples are shown in (a)). In (b) CIFAR-100 was used for OE andin (c) EMNIST. Columns are ordered by increasing anomaly score from left to right, i.e. what FCDDfinds the most nominal looking anomaly on the left to the most anomalous looking anomaly on theright.
Figure 5: Anomaly heatmaps of an ImageNet model trained on nominal class “acorns.” Here (a) arenominal samples and (b) are anomalous samples. Columns are ordered by increasing anomaly scorefrom left to right, i.e. what FCDD finds the most nominal looking on the left to the most anomalouslooking on the right for (a) nominal samples and (b) anomalies.
Figure 6: Anomaly heatmaps for three anomalous test samples on a CIFAR-10 model trained onnominal class “airplane.” The second, third, and fourth blocks show the heatmaps of FCDD, gradient-based heatmaps of HSC, and AE heatmaps respectively. For Ours and Grad, we grow the number ofOE samples from 2, 8, 128, 2048 to full OE. AE is not able to incorporate OE.
Figure 7: Confetti noise.
Figure 8: Heatmaps for horses on PASCAL VOC. Here (a) shows anomalous samples ordered frommost nominal to most anomalous from left to right, and (b) shows examples that indicate that themodel is a “Clever Hans,” i.e. has learned a characterization based on spurious features (watermarks).
Figure 9: Anomaly heatmaps for three anomalous test samples on CIFAR-10 models trained onnominal class “airplane.” We grow the receptive field size from 18 (left) to 32 (right).
Figure 10: Anomaly heatmaps for seven anomalous test samples of MVTec-AD. We grow thereceptive field size from 53 (left) to 243 (right).
Figure 11: Anomaly heatmaps for seven anomalous test samples of MVTec-AD. We grow σ from 4(left) to 16 (right).
Figure 12: Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples of a Fashion-MNIST model trained onnominal class “trousers.” In (a) CIFAR-100 was used for OE and in (b) EMNIST.
Figure 13: Anomaly heatmaps of an ImageNet model trained on nominal class “acorns.” (a) arenominal and (b) anomalous samples.
Figure 14: Anomaly heatmaps for three anomalous test samples (Input left) on a CIFAR-10 modeltrained on nominal class “airplane.” The second, third, and fourth blocks show the heatmaps ofFCDD (Ours), gradient-based heatmaps of HSC, and AE heatmaps respectively. For Ours and Grad,we grow the number of OE samples from 2, 8, 128, 2048 to full OE. AE is not able to incorporate OE.
Figure 15:	Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in Fashion-MNIST using CIFAR-100 OE.
Figure 16:	Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in Fashion-MNIST using EMNIST OE.
Figure 17:	Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in CIFAR-10. Columns are ordered byincreasing anomaly score from left to right. The subcaptions refer to the nominal class that eachmodel is trained on, for which some examples are also displayed as a separate column on the left.
Figure 18: Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in MVTec-AD. Columns are ordered byincreasing anomaly score from left to right. The subcaptions refer to the nominal class that eachmodel is trained on.
Figure 19:	Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in ImageNet, where classes 1-21 areshown. Columns are ordered by increasing anomaly score from left to right. The subcaptions refer tothe nominal class that each model is trained on, for which some examples are also displayed as aseparate column on the left.
Figure 20:	Anomaly heatmaps for anomalous test samples in ImageNet, where classes 22-30 areshown. Columns are ordered by increasing anomaly score from left to right. The subcaptions refer tothe nominal class that each model is trained on, for which some examples are also displayed as aseparate column on the left.
