Figure 1: The trajectory of depth-2 GD, WGD(t), converges to the trajectory of GLRL, WGLRL(t), as the initialization scale goes to 0.
Figure 2: GD passes by the same set of critical points as GLRL when the initialization scale is small, and gets much closer to the criticalpoints when L ≥ 3. Depth-2 GD requires a much smaller initialization scale to maintain small low-rankness. Here the ground truth matrixW * ∈ R20×20 is of rank 3 as stated in Appendix E.1. In this case, GLRL has 3 phases and 4 critical points {W r "=0, where W o = 0and W 3 = W *. For each depth L and initialization scale ∣∣ W (0) kF, we plot the distance between the current step of GD and the closestCritiCal point of GLRL, k WGd (t) — W r ∣f, the norm of full gradient, I^u1：l L(Ull)IIf and the (r + 1)-low-rankness of WGd (t)with r := argmin°≤i≤3 k WGD(t) — Wi∣F.
Figure 3: GD With small initialization outperforms R1MP and minimal nuclear norm solution onsynthetic data With loW-rank ground truth. Solid (dotted) curves correspond to test (training) loss.
Figure 4: Using v1v1> (denoted by “rank 1”) as initialization makes GD much closer to GLRLcompared to using random initialization (denoted by “rank d”), where v1 is the top eigenvector of-Vf (0). We take a fixed reference matrix on the trajectory of GLRL with constant norm and plotthe distance of GD with each initialization to it respectively..
Figure 5: Deep matrix factorization encourages GF to find low rank solutions at a much practicalinitialization scale, e.g. 10-3. Here the ground truth is rank-3. For each setting, we run 5 differentrandom seeds. The solid curves are the mean and the shaded area indicates one standard deviation.
Figure 6: The marginal value of being deeper. The trajectory of GD converges when depth goes toinfinity. Solid (dotted) curves correspond to test (train) loss. The x-axis stands for the normalizedcontinuous time t (multiplied by L).
Figure 7: Dynamics of 需=-Vf(0)ML/2 - ML/2Vf (0) plotted, where L = 4, uι(t) is thetop eigenvector of W(t) and is the relative magnitude of noise. The initialization we use in thisexperiment is WnOise(0)= W(0) + 等(Z + Z>), where W(0) is what we construct at Appendix L.2,and Z is a matrix where entries are i.i.d. samples from the standard Gaussian distribution N(0, 1).
