Figure 1: GVAR generalised coeffi-cients inferred for a time series withlinear dynamics.
Figure 2: GC summarygraph adjacency matrix ofthe Lorenz 96 system withp = 20. Dark cells corre-spond to the absence of a GCrelationship; light cells de-note a GC relationship.
Figure 3: Simulated tWo-speciesLotka-Volterra time series (top)and generalised coefficients (bot-tom). Prey have a positive effect onpredators, and vice versa.
Figure 4: GVAR hyperparameter grid search results for Lorenz 96 time series (under F = 40)across 5 values of λ ∈ [0.0, 3.0] and γ ∈ [0.0, 0.02]. Each cell shows average balanced accuracy(left) and AUPRC (right) across 5 replicates (darker colours correspond to lower performance) forone hyperparameter configuration.
Figure 5: GVAR hyperparameter grid search results for simulated fMRI time series across 5 valuesofλ ∈ [0.0, 3.0] andγ ∈ [0.0, 0.1]. The heat map on the left shows average BA scores, and the heatmap on the right - average AUPRCs.
Figure 6: Agreement (N) between GC structures inferred on the original and time-reversed dataacross a range of thresholds for one simulation of the Lorenz 96 (a) and multi-species Lotka-Volterra(b) systems. BA score (×) is evaluated against the ground truth adjacency matrix.
Figure 7: Adjacency matrices of Granger-causal summary graphs for Lorenz 96 (see Section 4.1.1),simulated fMRI (See Section 4.1.2), and multi-species Lotka-Volterra (See Section 4.2) time series.
Figure 8: GVAR hyperparameter grid search results for Lorenz 96 time series, under F = 10, across5 values of λ ∈ [0.0, 3.0] and γ ∈ [0.0, 0.02]. Each cell shows average balanced accuracy (left) andAUPRC (right) across 5 replicates.
Figure 9: GVAR hyperparameter grid search results for multi-species Lotka-Volterra time seriesacross 5 values of λ ∈ [0.0, 1.0] and γ ∈ [0.0, 0.01]. Heat maps above show balanced accuracies(a), AUPRCs (b), and balanced accuracies for positive (c) and negative (d) effects.
Figure 10: Inferential performance ofGVAR across a range of forcing constantvalues.
Figure 11: Signs ofGC relationships between variables in the Lotka-Volterra system given by Equa-tions 9 and 10, with p = 10. First ten columns correspond to prey species, whereas the last ten corre-spond to predators. Each prey species is ‘hunted’ by two predator species, and each predator species‘hunts’ two prey species. Similarly to the other experiments, we ignore self-causal relationships.
Figure 12: Variability of GVAR generalised coefficients throughout time for a simulation of themulti-species Lotka-Volterra system. Coefficients for Granger non-causal relationships fluctuatearound 0; for Granger-causal relationships, coefficients are consistently different from 0: positivefor prey → predator interactions and negative for predator → prey.
Figure 13: The adjacencymatrix of the GC summarygraph for the model given byEquation 14.
