Figure 1: Motivation of the Visual Transformer Network (VTNet). A target class (cellphone) ishighlighted by green bounding boxes. An agent first detects objects of interest from its observation.
Figure 2: Overview of our visual transformer navigation system. Our visual transformer navi-gation network (VTNet) involves a visual transformer (VT) and a navigation policy network. Theagent first fuses instance features and spatial features into spatial-enhanced local descriptor. Mean-while, the positional global descriptor is obtained by adding a positional embedding to the globalfeature. Then the visual representation is decoded from these two spatial-aware descriptors by ourVT. Our VTNet is pre-trained with the supervision of optimal navigation actions. The navigationpolicy network adopts A3C architecture and is trained with navigation rewards after pre-training.
Figure 3: Visual results of four different models in testing environments. The target objects(i.e., RemoteControl) are highlighted by the blue boxes. Green and red curves represent successand failure cases, respectively. The episode produced by our VTNet is successful in reaching thetarget and use shortest steps. In comparison, ORG takes more steps to reach the target. SAVN andBaseline miss both targets.
Figure 6: Visual results of four different models in testing environments. We compare VTNetwith SAVN (Wortsman et al., 2019), Baseline and ORG (Du et al., 2020). The target objects arehighlighted by the blue boxes. Green and red curves indicate success and failure cases, respectively.
Figure 7: Average episode lengths of VTNet and VTNet without pre-training during training.
Figure 8: Visualizations of attention scores. The target classes (i.e., StoveBurner, GarbageCan,Kettle) are highlighted by green bounding boxes. Our agent detects the instances of interest and thenattends the detected instances to the global image regions by our VT. We observe that high attentionscores are obtained on the areas corresponding to the targets. Guided by the visual representations,the agent selects actions to approach the targets.
