Figure 1: Training with AMIGO consists of combining two modules: a goal-generating teacher anda goal-conditioned student policy, whereby the teacher provides intrinsic goals to supplement theextrinsic goals from the environment. In our experimental set-up, the teacher is a dimensionality-preserving convolutional network which, at the beginning of an episode, outputs a location in absolute(x, y) coordinates. These are provided as a one-hot indicator in an extra channel of the student’sconvolutional neural network, which in turn outputs the agent’s actions.
Figure 2: Examples of MiniGrid environments. KCharder requires finding the key that can unlock adoor which blocks the room where the goal is (the blue ball). OMhard requires a sequence of correctsteps usually involving opening a door, opening a chest to find a key of the correct color, picking-upthe key to open the door, and opening the door to reach the goal. The configuration and colors of theobjects change from one episode to another. To our knowledge, AMIGo is the only algorithm thatcan solve these tasks. For other examples, see the MiniGrid repository.
Figure 3: Examples of a curriculum of goals proposed for different episodes of a particular learningtrajectory on OMhard. The red triangle is the agent, the red square is the goal proposed by theteacher, and the blue ball is the extrinsic goal. The top panel shows the threshold target difficulty, t*of the goals proposed by the teacher. The teacher first proposes very easy nearby goals, then it learnsto propose goals that involve traversing rooms and opening doors, while in the third phase the teacherproposes goals which involve removing obstacles and interacting with objects.
Figure 4: Reward curves over training time comparing AMIGo to competing methods and baselines.
Figure 5: An example of a learning trajectory on OMhard, one of the most challenging environments.
Figure 6: Some examples of goals during early, mid, and late stages of learning (examples forKCmedium, OMhard and OMmedium are first, second, and third rows respectively). The redtriangle is the agent, the red square is the goal proposed by the teacher, and the blue ball is theextrinsic goal.
