Figure 1: T-SNE plot showing Flowtron partitioning the z-space according to acoustic characteristics.
Figure 2: Mapping data (x) to the latent dimension (z) for K steps of flow. The right side shows aunrolled view of the NN() architecture. Text and speaker embeddings are channel-wise concatenatedto produce context matrix c. At every time step t, a recurrent attention mechanism computesa weighting distribution over the context matrix c to produce a weighted-sum reduction over c,which is then passed through an LSTM-Conv decoder architecture to generate affine parametersfor transforming xt+1 → x0t+1. As predicted parameters are always for the next time step, the firstiteration is conditioned on a pre-defined 0-vector.
Figure 3: Flowtron Mel-spectrograms illustrate increasing variability by using different σ2 and thatFlowtron is able to produce sharp harmonics with high σ2 and without Prenet or Postnet layers.
Figure 4: F0 contours obtained from samples generated by Flowtron and Tacotron 2 with differentvalues for σ2 and p. Flowtron provides more variability and expressivity than Tacotron 2.
Figure 5: Spectral profiles from the target style, from the Flowtron baseline generated using the prior,and from Flowtron samples generated using the posterior with different values for λ. These imagesshow that by decreasing the value of λ we gradually move the spectral profile from the baseline style(prior) to the target style (posterior).
Figure 6: Component assignments suggest that information in each component is gender dependent.
Figure 7: Sample duration given σ2 and p show that Flowtron provides more variation in sampleduration than Tacotron.
Figure 8: Visualization of the decoder in Tacotron 2 during training. Unlike Flowtron, Tacotron 2requires Prenet and Postnet layers to learn attention and produce sharp harmonics.
Figure 9: (a) shows that by translating one of the dimensions of z we are able to alter the pitchcontour of the sentence while keeping the length fixed. (b) shows that by translation one of thedimensions of z we are able to alter the length of the sentence while keeping a similar pitch contour.
