Figure 1: Non-stationary stochastic process modeling predicts mutation patterns and identifies cancer-specificdriver mutations. Biological processes are shown in blue, data processing is shown in orange. a. Areas of thegenome have varying epigenetic states (e.g. accessibility for transcription) depending on the tissue type. b.
Figure 2: Data simulation and regional parameters inference accuracy across methods. a. Simulated dataexperiment. Data simulation is shown in green, parameter inference is shown in orange. Simulated μR and σRare computed as the mean and variance of a sample’s KNN cluster. The model is trained over randomly sampledevent counts; the parameter estimates μR and ∂r are then compared to their true values. b. Pearson R2 to theobserved mutation count in the true (unsimulated) data (top) simulated mean (middle) and simulated variance(bottom) for the CNN+GP parameter estimation strategy (CNN+GP), random forest (RF), negative binomialregression (NBR) and binomial regression (BR). Results for additional estimation techniques are in Appendix.
Figure 3: SPG accurately models mutation density and detects driver events. a. Variance explained (Pearson R2)of the observed mutation count by our SPG, binomial regression (BR) and negative binomial regression (NBR)across length-scales. b. Observed (dashed blue) and predicted (solid orange) mutation density from our GM at1Mb regions across chromosome 1 in melanoma. (c) Quantile-quantile plots of expected and observed P-valuesfor gene driver detection in esophageal adenocarcinoma (purple) and driver regulatory element detection in livercancer (pink). Esophageal and liver were chosen only for the sake of readability; qq-plots are similar for allcancers. (d) Model detection of a well-known non-coding driver in the TERT promoter in melanoma at 1kbresolution. Black dashed lines: Bonferroni-corrected genome-wide significance thresholds.
Figure 4: Distribution of mutation counts in 50kb windows tiled across the genome with 36mer uniqueness>70% (see section B.3) for esophageal adenocarcinoma, skin melanoma, and stomach adenocarcinoma. Of note:esophageal adenocarcinoma has a highly skewed distribution, skin melanoma has high mutation counts relativeto the other cancers, and stomach adenocarcinoma has low mutation counts relative to the other cancers.
Figure 5: Model robustness to region size. We tested the robustness of our GM estimates to the choice of thescale of region R over which μR and σR2 were inferred with the CNN+GP. Here We show our GM's Pearson R2accuracy to the observed number of mutations over a range of sizes for different choices of initial region size S.
Figure 6: μR and σR estimation accuracy over three cancer types: esophageal adenocarcinoma (top row), Skinmelanoma (middle row), and stomach adenocarcinoma (bottom row). a. R2 accuracy of all models with respectto simulated μR (left) and σR (right) at 50kb. b. R2 accuracy of GP-based models to observed number ofmutations (left) and empirical variance (right) across scales in real data.
Figure 7: NBR and RF R2 accuracy (with CNN+GP as a reference) to observed number of mutations (top row)and empirical variance (bottom row) in real data and across multiple scales for each cancer type: melanoma(left), esophageal adenocarcinoma (middle) and stomach adenocarcinoma (right). Due to the Jackknife methodrequirement that the number of RF estimators be linear with respect to the number of samples, estimating RFvariance at scale <50kb was computationally infeasible (with >8,000 estimators).
Figure 8: Mean (μR) Vs variance (σR) at 5kb for the ground-truth simulated data (blue) and predictions for eachmodel across all cancer types: melanoma (left), esophageal adenocarcinoma (middle), stomach adenocarcinoma(right). NBR significantly over estimates σR2 in high mutation count regions because of its strict quadratic relationto the predicted mean. RF consistently underestimates σR2. FCNN+GP is accurate in low to medium mutationcount windows, but overestimates σR2 with respect to the CNN+GP in high mutation count regions.
Figure 9: Number of observed mutations versus number of expected mutations based on the sequence contextmodel alone in 50kb and 1kb regions with mappability >70% across the three cancers. Sequence context explains<10% of variance at 50kb and <1% of variance at 1kb scales for all cancers.
Figure 10: Log-log run-time of current whole-genome regression methods that require retraining per desiredscale. Run-time increases polynomially with scale beyond a threshold (where memory operations dominate thecomputation of the method).
Figure 11: -log10(P-value) quantile-quantile (qq) plots for expected vs observed number of mutations in 50bp and1kb windows using our graphical model with rate parameters estimated in 10kb regions for each cancer. Under aproperly calibrated null model, p-values generated from the null distribution are uniformly distributed betweenzero and one. QQ plots thus provide a qualitative assessment of the accuracy of a model’s null distribution: theobserved p-values should closely match the expected p-values from a uniform distribution (red line) except atextremely small p-values where observations from the alternate model should be found. The step-like nature ofthe qq-plot for stomach adenocarcinoma in 50bp regions is because the null distribution is discrete (negativebinomial) and the dataset has relatively few mutations; thus each 50bp bin can have only one of a few possiblemutation counts (typically between 0 and 5).
