Figure 1: Illustrative example using the popular task of Fonseca (1995): demonstrating the relationbetween Pareto front, preference rays, and solutions. Pareto front (black solid line) for a 2D lossspace and several rays (colored dashed lines) which represent various possible preferences. Left:A single PHN-EPO model learns the entire Pareto front, mapping any given preference ray to itscorresponding solution on the front. The data and task are detailed in Section 5.1.
Figure 2: A PHN h(∙; φ) receives an inputpreference ray r and outputs the correspond-ing model weights θr .
Figure 3: Multi-MNIST : Test losses produced by the competing method on three Multi-MNISTdatasets. Colors correspond to different preference vectors, using the same color map as in Figure 1.
Figure 4: Accuracy-Fairness trade-off : The trade-off between the main classification loss and thetwo fairness losses, on the test sets of the three fairness datasets. Each line corresponds to a differentsolution along the Pareto front, generated using PHN-EPO.
Figure 5: HV vs runtime (min.) comparing PHN with preference-specific LS and EPO. For LS andEPO, each value was computed by evaluating with a subset of models. PHN achieves higher HVsignificantly faster (x-axis is in log scale). Shaded area marks the variance across selected subsets.
Figure 6: Illustrative example using the popular task of Fonseca (1995): The genetic algorithmMOEA/D fails to reach the exact pareto front after 100, 000 generations. MGDA reaches Paretooptimal solutions, but is not suitable for generating preference-specific solutions and only covers asmall fraction of the pareto front.
Figure 7: Known Pareto front: Top: Evaluation on Problem 2 from Evtushenko & Posypkin (2013).
Figure 8: PHN interpretation: PHN is provided with a sample from the Multi-MNIST dataset,where an image of 3 and an image 7 are overlayed. We show the effect that conditioning on differentpreference rays (left) has on the decision made by the model. Red pixels denote increased contributionto the prediction. See text for details.
Figure 9: Hyperparameters analysis: Performance analysis on the Multi-Fashion + MNIST dataset,for different architecture designs and sampling choices.
Figure 10: Runtime analysis for NYUv2, and two additional Multi-MNIST dataset.
Figure 11: Hypervolume illustration: The colored area represents the hypervolume obtained by Paretoset {P1, P2, P3} with respect to the reference point.
