Figure 1: A composed model in a cascading way for M = 4.
Figure 2: Calibration comparison; default parameters of C are K = 20, n = 20,000, and δ = 10-2.
Figure 3: Fast DNN inference results; default parameters are n = 20,000, ξ = 0.02, and δ = 10-3.
Figure 4: Safe planning results; default parameters are: n = 20,000, ξ = 0.1, δ = 10-2.
Figure 5: Calibration compariSon in reliability diagramS and ECES. The Size of validation Set forcalibration iS 20, 000. The blue hiStogram repreSentS the example ratio for the correSponding bin.
Figure 6: Calibration compariSon via reliability diagramS and ECE. The Size of validation Set forcalibration iS 2, 000. See the caption of Figure 5 for interpretation. For the induced intervalS, thelength of the interval iS larger than that with n = 20, 000 due to the eStimation error.
Figure 7: Accuracy-confidence plot. ThiS plot iS uSeful for chooSing a proper confidencethreShold that achieveS a deSired conditional accuracy (LakShminarayanan et al., 2017); the x-axiS iS the confidence threShold t and the y-axiS iS the empirical value of the conditional ac-curacy P [y(x) = y | P(X) ≥ t]. Since our approach outputs an interval [c(x),c(x)], We plotIP [y(x) = y | c(x) ≥ t] and IP [y(x) = y | c(x) ≥ t] for the upper and lower bound of the greenarea, respectively.
Figure 8: Ablation study on various n for ξ = 0.02, δ = 10-2, and M = 2. Each plot uses theshown number of samples n with the same ξ and δ. The “estimated trade-off” represents the errorand MACs trade-off depending on threshold γ1. The markers show the trade-off by the baselines.
Figure 9: Ablation study on various ξ for n = 20, 000, δ = 10-2, and M = 2. Each plot usesthe shown desired relative error ξ with the same n and δ. The “estimated trade-off” represents theerror and MACs trade-off depending on threshold γ1. The markers show the trade-off by the shownbaselines. The “desired error” is a user-specified error bound, where the error of each method needto be below of this line. The proposed approach allows more error as at most specified by the desirederror, to reduce the inference speed. Other baselines either overly increase the error or conservativelymaintain overly low error.
Figure 10: Ablation study on various δ for n = 20, 000, ξ = 0.02, and M = 2. Each plot usesthe shown misconfidence level δ with the same n and ξ. The “estimated trade-off” represents theerror and MACs trade-off depending on threshold γ1. The markers show the trade-off by the shownbaselines. The “desired error” is a user-specified error bound, where the error of each method needto be below of this line. The proposed approach produces larger error gap toward the desired error aswe enforce stronger confidence level—i.e., from δ = 10-1 to δ = 10-4. Note that other baselinesdo not depend on δ as designed.
Figure 11: Ablation study on various n for ξ = 0.1 and δ = 10-2. Each plot uses the shown samplesize n with the same ξ and δ. The “naive”, “g-naive”, and “histogram binning" represent baselineresults on the safety rate and success rate. The proposed approach is labeled “rigorous”. The desiredsafety rate is a user-specified rate, where the safety rate of each method need to be above of this line.
Figure 12: Ablation study on various ξ for n = 20, 000 and δ = 10-2. Each plot uses the showndesired unsafe rate ξ with the same n and δ. The “naive"，“g-naive"，and “histogram binning”represent baseline results on the safety rate and success rate. The proposed approach is labeled“rigorous". The desired safety rate is a user-specified rate， where the safety rate of each methodneed to be above of this line. The safety rate of the proposed approach is closely above the desiredsafety rate to satisfy the safety constraint. However， the naive can violate the safety constraint， andthe ξ-naive can be overly optimistic. The histogram binning and ξ-naive look empirically fine， butthey can in theory violate desired safety rate (e.g., see Figure 4b).
Figure 13: Ablation study on various δ for n = 20, 000 and ξ = 0.1. Each plot uses the shownmisconfidence level ξ with the same n and ξ. The “naive”, “g-naive"，and “histogram binning”represent baseline results on the safety rate and success rate. The proposed approach is labeled“rigorous”. The desired safety rate is a user-specified rate, where the safety rate of each methodneed to be above of this line. The proposed approach produces more conservative safety rates—i.e., larger gap between the estimated safety rate and desired safety rate—as we enforce strongerconfidence level—i.e., from δ = 10-1 to δ = 10-4. Note that other baselines do not depend on δ asdesigned.
