Figure 1: (a), (b), and (c): Interpolated covariances for the different projections for various values ofη. For Frobenius and Wasserstein the intermediate distributions clearly have a larger entropy, whilefor the KL projection the intermediate entropy is smaller. (d): Entropy of the interpolated distribu-tions. In this example π and πold have the same entropy. It can be seen that the entropy increasesfor the Frobenius and Wasserstein projections when transitioning between the distributions, while itdecreases for the KL. A more general statement regarding this can be found in Theorem 1.
Figure 2: (Left): Mean KL divergence for Ant-V2 as a standardizing measure to compare the policychanges among all methods. (Center): Mahalanobis distance between the mean values of the unpro-jected and old policy when using different α in comparison to a full regression. The mean boundfor the W2 projection is set to 0.03 (dotted black line). (Right): Mean cumulative reward with 95%confidence interval based on 40 seeds for the semi-sparse 5-link Reacher task. For each method,besides PAPI, We train policies with (dashed) and without (solid) contextual covariances.
Figure 3: Compute graph of the KL projection layer. The layer first computes the natural parametersof π from the mean and covariance. Then it numerically optimizes the dual to obtain the optimalLagrangian multipliers which are used to get the optimal natural parameters. Ultimately, the optimalmean and covariance are computed from the optimal natural parameters. We omit the dependencyon constants, i.e., the bound e and β as well as the parameters of πold for clarity of the visualization.
Figure 4:	Training curves for the projection layer as well as PPO and PAPI on the test environment.
Figure 5:	Training curves for the projection layer with entropy control (-E) as well as PPO and PAPIon the test environment. We trained 40 agents with different seeds for each environment using fiveevaluation episodes for every data point. The plot shows the total mean reward with 95% confidenceinterval.
