Figure 1: The standard (top) and robust (bottom)test error rate comparison, between the vanillaPGD-AT baseline (Madry et al., 2018), and PGD-AT with our proposed weight/label smootheningtechniques applied, on CIFAR-10 with ResNet-18. Our methods effectively mitigates the robustoverfitting (Rice et al., 2020) even when trainedto 200 epochs, while maintaining the same highstandard/robust accuracies compared to the bestearly-stop checkpoint of the baseline.
Figure 2: Comparing the logit distributionof different LS/KD means on CIFAR-10 us-ing ResNet-18 (C7 is the correct label).
Figure 3: Results of testing accuracy over epochs for ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10,and Tiny ImageNet. Dash / Solid lines show the standard accuracy (SA) / robust accuracy (RA). Blue, Green,Black and Orange curves represent the performance of Baseline, KD, SWA and KD&SWA respectively.
Figure 4: (Left) Transfer attack performance on an unseen robust model, where attacks are generated byBaseline, KD, and KD&SWA’s different epoch checkpoints. (Right) Transfer attack performance on modelsfrom Baseline, KD, and KD&SWA, where attacks are generated by an unseen robust model. The unseen robustmodel is a ResNet-50 trained by PGD-10. All experiments are conducted on the CIFAR-100 dataset.
Figure 5: t-SNE results of different logits smoothing approaches on CIFAR-10. Dots and stars represent forclean and adversarial images respectively. Orange, Blue and Green represent classes A, B and C respectively.
Figure 6: Comparison of loss landscapes of models trained by baseline (the first row) and our methods (thesecond roW). Loss plots in each column are generated from the same original image randomly chosen from theCIFAR-100 test dataset. z axis denotes the loss value. Following the settings in (Engstrom et al., 2018), we plotthe loss landscape function: Z = loss(x ∙ ri + y ∙ r2), where ri = sign(Vif (i)) and r2 〜Rademacher(0.5).
Figure 7: Robust testing loss asa function of perturbed weight dis-tance, starting from models trained byPGD-AT baseline and our methods onCIFAR-100.
Figure A8: Results of testing accuracy over epochs for ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-100 with the same settingas Rice et al. (2020). Dash lines show the standard accuracy (SA); solid lines represent the robust accuracy(RA). Blue, Green and Orange curves represent the performance of Baseline, KD and KD&SWA respectively.
Figure A9: t-SNE results of different models trained on CIFAR-100. Dots and stars represent forclean and adversarial images respectively. Red, Blue and Green represent classes A, B and C respec-tively. For each class, we visualize all training images and their corresponding adversarial imagesfrom PGD-10. The left figure is Baseline; the right figure is Our Methods.
