Figure 1: An illustration of applying RRR paradigm. (Left) In a typical experience replay scenario,samples from prior tasks are kept in a memory buffer Mrep and revisited during training. (Right)In our proposed idea (RRR), in addition to Mrep, we also store model explanations (saliency maps)as MRRR for those samples and encourage the model to remember the original reasoning for theprediction. Note that the saliency maps are small masks resulting in a negligible memory overhead(see Section 4.1).
Figure 2: Few-shot CIL learning of CUB200 in 11 tasks where each point shows the classificationaccuracy on all seen classes so far. (Left) Shows ER with and without LRRR using different back-bone architectures and saliency map techniques. (Right) Performance of the state-of-the-art existingapproaches with and without LRRR on CUB200 including TOPIC (Tao et al., 2020), EEIL (Castroet al., 2018), iCaRL (Rebuffi et al., 2017). Joint training serves as the upper bound. Results forbaselines are obtained using their original implementation. All results are averaged over 3 runs andmean and standard deviation values are given in the appendix. Best viewed in color.
Figure 3: Effect of RRR on existing methods for CIL on CIFAR100 in (a) 10 and (b) 20 tasks and(c) ImageNet100 in 10 tasks. Each point shows the classification accuracy on all seen classes sofar. Results for iTAML, BiC, and EEIL are produced with their original implementation while EWCand LwF are re-implemented by us. All results are averaged over 3 runs and mean and standarddeviation values are given in the appendix. Best viewed in color.
Figure 4: An illustration of the progression of saliencies on an image from the test set of the secondtask, evaluated after the model is trained on tasks #2, #5, #7, #9, and #11 on CUB200. Failure casefor ER w.o. LRRR (top row), where saliency drifts from the original and the prediction becomesincorrect. ER+RRR (bottom row) retains close to the original saliency as the model trains on moretasks, with the exception of Task #5 which it is able to correct later on. Its performance is retainedas well, for saliencies that are close to the original.
Figure 5: An example of PG evaluation as hit for an image in CUB200. Left: image SalienCy map overlaid onthe image. Right: the segmentation label where the red cross marks the peak saliency.
