Figure 1: Previous certificates consider each node independently. Most nodes cannot be certifiedsince the adversary can choose a different perturbed graph per node (left). This is impossible in prac-tice due to mutually exclusive perturbations. Our collective certificate enforces a single perturbedgraph (center). It aggregates the amount of perturbation within each receptive field and then evalu-ates a single-node certificate to determine whether the corresponding prediction is robust (right).
Figure 3: Two-dimensional colective certificatefor smoothed GCN on Cora-ML under varyingrXdel and rAdel . The solid and dotted contourlines show ratios ≥ 0.5 and ≥ 0.7 for ourvs. the naive certificate respectively. Our methodachieves much larger certified ratios and radii.
Figure 2: Certified ratios for smoothed GCN onCora, Citeseer and PubMed, under varying rXdel.
Figure 5: Certifying GCN on Citeseer, un-der varying rXadd using Zui gner & Gui nnemann(2019)’s base certificate. Our certificate yieldssignificantly larger certified ratios and radii.
Figure 4: Comparison of certified ratios for GAT,GCN and APPNP on Cora-ML under varyingrXdeι for our (solid lines) and the naive (dottedlines) collective certificate.
Figure 6: Certified ratios for smoothed GCNon Cora-ML, under varying rAdel and rAdel,loc .
Figure 7: Certified ratios for smoothed GCN onCora-ML. We vary rXdel and σ. The certified ra-tios remain constant and non-zero for large rAdel.
Figure 8:	Certified ratios for smoothed GCN,RGCN and soft medoid aggregation on Cora-MLunder varying rXdel for our (solid lines) and thenaive (dotted lines) collective certificate.
Figure 9:	Certified ratios for smoothed GCN onWebKB and Reuters-21578, under varying rXdelfor our (solid lines) and the naive (dotted lines)collective certificate.
Figure 10: Comparison of the proposed collective certificate (Fig. 10a) to the naive collective cer-tificate (Fig. 10b) for certification of smoothed GCN on Cora-ML, under varying rXadd and rXdel .
Figure 11: Certified ratios for smoothed GCN on Cora, under varying rXdel (Fig. 11a) andrAdel (F ig. 11b), using the mixed-integer collective certificate (blue line) and the relaxed linearprogramming certificate (orange line). The integrality gap is small, relative to the certified ratio.
