Figure 1: (a) A sample hypergraph overlaid on a physical system with six action vertices. (b) Aninstance building block of our framework for a sample hyperedge. (c) An architecture is realised bystacking several building blocks, one for each hyperedge in the hypergraph.
Figure 2: (a) A standard model. (b) A class ofmodels in our framework, depicted by the orderedspace of possible hyperedges E. Our class of mod-els subsumes the standard one as an instance.
Figure 3: Prediction error in our illustrative multi-armed bandits with three action dimensions andincreasing action-space sizes. Each variant is run on 64 reward functions in any action-space size.
Figure 4: Difference in human-normalised score for 29 Atari 2600 games with 18 valid actions,HGQN versus DQN over 200 training iterations (positive % means HGQN outperforms DQN).
Figure 5: Human-normalisedmedian and mean scores across29 Atari 2600 games with 18valid actions. Random seeds areshown as traces.
Figure 6: Learning curves for HGQN, DQN, and a simplified version of Rainbow in physical controlbenchmarks of PyBullet (nine random seeds). Shaded regions indicate standard deviation. Averageperformance of DDPG trained for 3 million environment steps is provided for illustration purposes.
Figure 7: (a) Average (bars) and minimum-maximum (error bars) per-hyperedge representation ofthe greedy action over 90000 steps (nine trained rank-3 HGQN models, 10000 steps each). (b) Theactuation morphology of each respective domain is provided for reference.
Figure 8: Learning curves in 29 Atari 2600 games with 18 valid actions for HGQN and DQN.
Figure 9: Difference in human-normalised score for six Atari 2600 games with 18 valid actions, fea-turing the three best and worst-performing games from Fig. 4 (positive % means HGQN outperformsDQN or HG-RainboWt outperforms RainboWt over 200 training iterations).
Figure 10: Learning curves for HGQN, HG-RainboWt, DQN, and RainboWt in six Atari 2600 gamesWith 18 valid actions, featuring the three best and Worst-performing games from Fig. 4.
