Figure 1: Real world video understanding. Consider this iconic movie scene from The Godfatherin (a), where the protagonist leaves the table, goes to the bathroom to extract a hidden firearm, andreturns to the table presumably with the intentions of shooting a person. While the gun itself isvisible in only a few frames of the whole clip, it is trivial for us to realize that the protagonist has itin the last frame. An even simpler instantiation of such a reasoning task could be the cup-and-ballshell game in (b), where the task is to determine which of the cups contain the ball at the end of thetrick. Can we design similarly hard tasks for computers?where the operator in control is trying to make the observer fail. Needless to say, a frame by frameprediction model would be incapable of solving such tasks.
Figure 2: CATER dataset and tasks. Sampled frames from a random video from CATER. Weshow some of the actions afforded by objects in this video, as labeled on the top using arrows. Wedefine three tasks on these videos. Task 1 requires identifying all active actions in the video. Task 2requires identifying all active compositional actions. Task 3 requires quantized spatial localizationof the snitch object at the end of the video. Note that, as in this case, the snitch may be occludedor ‘contained’ by another object, and hence models would require spatiotemporal understanding tocomplete the task. Please refer to the supplementary video for more example videos.
Figure 3: Allen’s temporal algebra. Exhaustive list of temporal relations between intervals, asdefined by Allen’s algebra (Allen, 1983). For simplicity, we group them into three broad relations todefine classes for composite actions, although in principle we could use all thirteen. Figure courtesyof (Alspaugh).
Figure 4: Diagnostic analysis of localization performance. We bin the test set using certain pa-rameters. For each, we show the test set distribution with the bar graph, the performance over thatbin using the line plot, and performance of that model on the full val set with the dotted line. We findthat localization performance, (a) Drops significantly if the snitch is kept moving till the end. Thisis possibly because for cases when snitch only moves in the beginning and is static after, the modelshave a lot more evidence to predict the correct location from. Interestingly the tracker is much lessaffected by this, as it tracks the snitch until the very end; (b) Drops if the snitch is ‘contain’-ed byanother object in the end, and the tracker is the worst affected by it; (c) Drops initially with increas-ing displacement of the snitch from its start position, but is stable after that; and (d) Is relativelystable with different number of objects in the scene.
Figure 5: Easiest/hardest videos for localization. We analyze the top most confident a) correct andb) incorrect predictions on the test videos for localization task. For each video, we show the lastframe, followed by a top-down view of the 6 × 6 grid. The grid is further overlayed with: 1) theground truth positions of the snitch over time, shown as the golden trail, which fades in color overtime =⇒ brighter yellow depicts later positions; and 2) the softmax prediction confidence scoresfor each location (black is low, white is high). The model has easiest time classifying the locationwhen the snitch does not move much or moves early on in the video. Full video in supplementary.
Figure 6: Train/val distribution. Histograms of training and validation data distribution for differ-ent tasks we define on the dataset. (a) requires the model to recognize atomic actions, such as ‘asphere slides’. We defined 13 such classes. (b) requires recognizing spatiotemporal compositions ofactions, such as ‘a sphere slides while a cube rotates’. Since there are a total of 588 combinations,we omit the labels here for ease of visualization. Finally (c) evaluates the snitch localization task,where the model needs to answer where the snitch is on the board, quantized into a 6 × 6 grid, at theend of the video. This is defined as a 36-way classification problem.
