Figure 1: An overview of our approach. 1 Fit rotation-equivariant CNN to predict neural responsesand use readout vectors ri as proxies for neural computations. 2 Align readouts to account fordifferent preferred orientations. 3 Cluster the aligned readouts.
Figure 2: Toy example illustrating the computations in a rotation-equivariant CNN with two features(red and blue; cartoon feature representations are shown on top of corresponding values of Φ(x))in three orientations (0, π∕3, 2π∕3). A: Output of the rotation-equivariant CNN for an input imagerotated by ∏∕3 (base orientation) can be computed by a cyclic shift. B: Example of two distincttypes of neurons (columns) in three orientations (rows). Computations for both types consist oflinear combinations of the two features computed by the CNN with the same weights, but in differentrelative orientations. Readouts of neurons of the same type in different orientations are cyclic shiftsof each other, since they produce the same outputs on correspondingly rotated inputs.
Figure 3: Distance between two vec-tors (top left corner) with first onefixed and second cyclically shiftedby an angle on the x-axis. Contin-uous relaxation (shades of blue) oflinearly interpolated (black) cyclicshifts smooths gradients and helpsovercome local minima.
Figure 4: Synthetic data set: generation, alignment and dependence on noise. A: Panel R showsthe unaligned synthetic data set as well as the corresponding shifted GP samples for each of the twogroups of neurons (see details in the main text). Colored boxes in R correspond to the colors ofcorresponding GP samples. Panels R(α*) and R(0) show aligned readouts and readouts rotatedby 0 using Eq. (4) respectively. R(0) should be similar to R for an adequate choice of β (andconsequently optimised value of T). B: Effect of observation noise. Means of pairwise distancesfor each of the two groups shown in matrix R for two levels of Gaussian noise added to the dataset.
Figure 5: Test set like-lihood of GMMs appliedto R as a function of thenumber of clusters.
Figure 6: 2D t-SNE embedding of the aligned readouts R, colored according to the GMM clusteringwith 100 components. Black stars show the locations of cluster centers. For some of the clusters,the MEIs of 16 best predicted neurons of that cluster are shown. The titles in the MEI subfiguresshow which matrix block in Fig. 7 (left) that cluster belongs to.
Figure 7: Left: Cluster confusion matrix (100 × 100) for 100 clusters shown in Fig. 6. Rowsand columns have been arranged into 17 groups (blocks). Right: MEI confusion matrix for well-predicted neurons (test correlation ≥ 0.7) arranged into the same 17 blocks as on the left.
Figure A1: 2D t-SNE embedding of the aligned readouts RR with feature weights randomly permutedfor each of the neurons. The colors correspond to the GMM clustering with 100 components. Blackstars show the locations of cluster centers. For some of the clusters, the MEIs of 16 best predictedneurons of that cluster are shown.
Figure A2: 2D t-SNE embedding of the aligned readouts RR with feature weights randomly permutedacross the neurons. The colors correspond to the GMM clustering with 100 components. Black starsshow the locations of cluster centers. For some of the clusters, the MEIs of 16 best predicted neuronsof that cluster are shown.
Figure A3: t-SNE embeddings for the aligned readouts (Fig. 6), and the controls with randomlypermuted features for each neuron (Fig. A1) and across the neurons (Fig. A2).
Figure B1: Alignment of a synthetic dataset of 100 observations generated using the proceduredescribed in Sec. 4 for different amount of i.i.d. Gaussian noise added to the observations. Thepanels for each noise level show the 16 (out of 100) examples of the raw and aligned data as wellthe t-SNE embeddings of raw and aligned data coloured according to the GMM clustering with twocomponents.
Figure C1: Sequential merges of the three pairs of blocks with the highest correlations in the clusterconfusion matrix (Fig. 7, left). The merged blocks and the correlation values are shown in the titlesof panels.
Figure C2: Sequential splits of the three pairs of blocks in the cluster confusion matrix (Fig. 7, left).
