Figure 1: Overview of latent space prediction propagated over multiple stepsto fail. For instance, in the example above, the rewrite would fail if we used equation x + y = y + xas a rewrite parameter instead, since the expression 32 = z does not contain any + operators tomatch with.
Figure 2: Depiction of thenetwork architecturetheorem P rewrites T. The perceptron p is trained with logistic re-gression on the success/fail-bit of the rewrite. Formally, this output is p(c(γ(T), π(P))), which wealso refer to as p(T, P) or p(γ (T), π(P)).
Figure 3: Depiction of the network ar-chitecturethe function p described above. Training σ fixes the embedding space L, from which we predictrewrite success.
Figure 5: The distribution of successful rewrites foreach parameter P, computed over all (T, P) pairs in thedatabase. Note that a small portion of parameters can beused for many theorems. This allows the Random andUsage baselines to achieve above-chance performanceby predicting success based on parameter alone.
Figure 4: Detailed view of embedding generation scheme for the True, Pred (One Step), and Pred (Multi Step)curves.
Figure 6:	Left: Histograms of scores for first step of rewrite predictions (top), ninth step of rewrite predictions(middle), and random baseline (bottom). Right: Corresponding ROC curves.
Figure 7:	Left: Comparison of Area under ROC curves for each embedding method. Right: Comparison ofROC curves for each embedding method after the ninth rewrite.
Figure 8: Left: Histogram ofl2 distances between each embedding method and the true embedding for rewritesteps 1 (top) and 9 (bottom). Right: Plot showing the mean l2 distances across rewrite steps.
Figure 9: Left: Comparison of Area under RoC curves for each architecture, using predictions fully in thelatent space (Pred (Multi Step)). Right: Corresponding ROC curves after the ninth rewrite step.
Figure 10: Left: Histogram of scores for R(R(T, P0), P) where R(T, P) succeeds (top) and where R(T, P)fails (bottom). Right: Corresponding ROC curves.
Figure 11: tSNE visualization of embedding spaces.
