Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Unsupervised Vision-Language Grammar
Induction with Shared Structure Modeling
Bo Wan1, Wenjuan Han2f Zilong Zheng2, Tinne Tuytelaars1
1.	Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven;
2.	Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{bwan;Tinne.Tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be;
{hanwenjuan;zlzheng}@bigai.ai
Ab stract
We introduce a new task, unsupervised vision-language (VL) grammar induction.
Given an image-caption pair, the goal is to extract a shared hierarchical struc-
ture for both image and language simultaneously. We argue that such structured
output, grounded in both modalities, is a clear step towards the high-level under-
standing of multimodal information. Besides challenges existing in conventional
visually grounded grammar induction tasks, VL grammar induction requires a
model to capture contextual semantics and perform a fine-grained alignment. To
address these challenges, we propose a novel method, CLIORA, which constructs
a shared vision-language constituency tree structure with context-dependent se-
mantics for all constituents in different levels of the tree. It computes a matching
score between each constituent and image region, trained via contrastive learning.
It integrates two levels of fusion, namely at feature-level and at score-level, so as
to allow fine-grained alignment. We introduce a new evaluation metric: Critical
Concept Recall Rate (CCRR) to explicitly evaluate VL grammar induction, and
show a 2.6% improvement over a strong baseline on Flickr30k Entities. We also
evaluate our model via two derived tasks, i.e., language grammar induction and
phrase grounding, and improve over the state-of-the-art for both.
1 Introduction
Humans are amazing at extracting knowledge efficiently from our complicated and multimodal
world, leveraging both redundant and complementary information from visual, acoustic, or tac-
tile cues. Investigating into such behavior, neuroimaging and neuroanatomical studies suggested
that specific brain regions are dispatched to support the convergence of auditory and visual word
comprehension (Calvert et al., 1997; Campbell, 2008; Keitel et al., 2020). For example, auditory
regions are involved in lip reading by receiving signals from visual cortices (Bourguignon et al.,
2020). These observations imply a mysterious “shared world” when perceiving multimodal signals,
functioning as a centralized processor for understanding fused information. In contrast, such phe-
nomena have not been revealed in modern state-of-the-art VL models, most of which process visual
and language signals in two separate streams and fuse the results only in the final stage (Ma et al.,
2015; You et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019; Kojima et al., 2020; Zhao & Titov, 2020b).
In this work, we dive into the “shared world” for vision-language (VL) representations and introduce
a new challenge - unsupervised VL grammar induction - aiming at extracting the shared hierarChi-
cal structure for both vision and language simultaneously. As a brief introduction, conventional
grammar induction (Figure 1(a)), specifically constituency grammar induction, captures syntactic
information in the form of constituency trees, which provide extra interpretability to downstream
tasks, e.g., semantic role labeling (Strubell et al., 2018), sentence completion (Zhang et al., 2016)
and word representation (Kuncoro et al., 2020). It is commonly formulated as a self-contained sys-
tem that relies solely on language corpora (Kim et al., 2019a; Drozdov et al., 2019; 2020; Shen
et al., 2018; 2019). On top of this, Shi et al. (2019) proposes visually-grounded grammar induction,
focusing on enhancing language grammar induction performance by leveraging additional visual
information. Similar benefits of multi-modality on grammar induction have also been demonstrated
φCorresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/bobwan1995/cliora.git
1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
by Zhao & Titov (2020b); Zhang et al. (2021); Hong
et al. (2021). These works, however, fail to consider
a unified VL structure, nor have they demonstrated
impact on visual understanding.
Different from prior arts, unsupervised VL grammar
induction aims to construct a shared constituency
structure at a fine-grained level for both the input
image and the corresponding language caption; see
Figure 1(b). It requires capabilities of structured pre-
diction for a single-modality (language constituency
structure) along with fine-grained alignment with
heterogeneous modalities, while only having access
to associated image-caption pairs for training (no
human-generated ground truth) . Besides the general
(a)
Language
Grammar
Induction
A man pushes a boy
on a zip-line
A man pushes a boy on a zip-line
(b)
Vision-
Language
Grammar
Induction
A man pushes a boy
on a zip-line
Figure 1: Task illustration of (a) conven-
tional grammar induction for natural language and
(b) VL grammar induction.
challenge of the unsupervised setting existing in conventional visually-grounded grammar induction
tasks, we highlight two main challenges specific to our proposed new task:
1.	Context-dependent semantic representation learning. The non-terminal symbol ofa conventional
constituency structure is a category label from a limited set (Hopcroft et al., 2001). (1) Such lim-
itation leads to tractable learning but limited expressive power as it lacks semantics from words.
In particular, sharing the same representation in the tree structure leads to semantic ambiguities.
For example, two NP nodes in the tree represent two different phrases, but may have the same
embedding. (2) Apart from lacking semantics from words, it also lacks rich contextual encoding
of the phrases. Simply associating each symbol with specific words or contexts, as done in Zhu
et al. (2020), would lead to memory explosion. (3) Besides textual data as context, exploiting the
visual data as context information also remains a challenge.
2.	Fine-grained vision-language alignment for all levels of the hierarchical structure. Instead of fus-
ing information of the entire image into the phrase representations, as done in visually-grounded
grammar induction (Shi et al., 2019; Zhao & Titov, 2020b), VL grammar induction requires each
phrase in the structure to align with a specific Region of Interest (RoI) in the image. Such fine-
grained alignment enables the model to have a thorough understanding of the image (Anderson
et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2019). However, the fine-grained alignment is difficult to deal with
because the feature sets generated from different modalities are different in nature.
To address these challenges, we propose a potential approach, namely Contrastive Language-
Image inside-Outside Recursive Autoencoder (CLIORA). It leverages the previous success of
DIORA (Drozdov et al., 2019) on context-dependent grammar induction for language and extends
it in a multimodal scenario. Specifically, as sketched in Figure 2, it first extracts features from both
modalities, then incorporates the inside-outside algorithm to compute the constituents and construct
the constituency structure. Already at this stage, we combine the two modalities, by recursively
having the language span embeddings attend to the visual features. We refer to this as feature-level
fusion. This makes the phrases aware of the visual context, effectively exploiting the visual context
as well as the textual semantics as context information, addressing the first challenge. On top of
that, we compute a matching score between each constituent and image region. This score is used
to promote the cross-modal fine-grained correspondence, leveraging the supervisory signal of the
image-caption pairs via a contrastive learning strategy. Here, we further fuse the two modalities, by
weighting the cross-modal matching score with the constituent’s score given by the induced gram-
mar. We refer to this as score-level fusion. This ensures fine-grained alignment in every level of the
tree structure, addressing the second challenge.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold: (i) A new challenging task - unsupervised VL gram-
mar induction for better cross-modal understanding, and a new metric to evaluate it; (ii) A novel
method, CLIORA, to build the VL structure by context encoding with a multi-level fusion strategy;
(iii) New state-of-the-art performance on MSCOCO and Flickr30k Entities benchmarks.
2	Task Definition
VL Structure Formulation We introduce the shared VL constituency tree structure (VL structure)
in Figure 1 to represent the shared semantics for cross-modality. In detail, given a sentence x “
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
tx1, x2, ..., xnu with n words and an associated image I, the VL structure y, is formed in a phrase-
structure tree similar to Chomsky Normal Form (CNF) (Chomsky, 1959), where each non-terminal
node in the tree will have exactly two children. Formally, a VL structure y is a set of constituents1
tpci,j, bi,j qu that forms a tree structure of x. Each non-terminal node of the tree contains a language
span (said informally, phrase) ci,j corresponding to a sequence of words {xi,Xi'i,...,Xj}, and an
aligned box region bi,j P R4 in the image I. ci,j is said to be grounded to bi,j .
Different from the usual linguistic setting in context-free grammars (Hopcroft et al., 2001), the fea-
tures of our non-terminal nodes contain rich context-dependent semantics instead of a category label.
This results in a structure with powerful expressive ability, but simultaneously a high computational
complexity if using conventional approaches (e.g., Kim et al. (2019a)) to model it, as claimed in
Yang et al. (2021); Han et al. (2017). On the image side, the structure provides explainable scene
understanding. Different from the flat form of the structure typically used in phrase grounding (Wang
et al., 2020a), each node in the hierarchical structure is associated with an image region. Different
from scene parsing (Zhao et al., 2017), regions of different nodes are allowed to overlap.
Task Formulation In unsupervised VL grammar induction, the goal is to induce phrase-structure
grammars from only image-caption pairs without tree structure annotations nor phrase-region corre-
spondence annotations for training2 *. Formally, we aim to learn a model M, which takes an image I
and a language description x as input and predicts the VL structure y, i.e., y “ MpI, xq. Note that
different from Wang et al. (2020a) who predict the corresponding regions for a given set of noun
phrases, noun phrases in VL grammar induction are unknown and all spans in the VL structure are
aligned to corresponding regions in the image.
Evaluation Metrics Due to lacking annotations of VL structure, we indirectly assess our model
by two derived tasks from each modality’s perspective, i.e. language grammar induction and phrase
grounding. Furthermore, we propose a new evaluation metric and conduct a frontal evaluation for
the VL structure we obtained.
Lateral EvaluatiOn For language grammar induction, We use two widely-used metrics: the av-
eraged corpus-level F1 and averaged sentence-level F1 numbers along with the unbiased standard
deviations following Zhao & Titov (2020a). For visual grounding, we report the grounding accu-
racy. We consider a noun phrase correctly grounded if its predicted bounding box has at least 0.5
IoU (Intersection over Union) with the ground-truth location. The grounding accuracy (ACC) is the
fraction of correctly grounded noun phrases (from a given set of noun phrases).
FrOntal EvaluatiOn We propose a new metric, critical concept recall rate (CCRR), to explicitly
evaluate the VL structure. A critical concept is a noun phrase found in visual grounding annotations.
We say a critical concept is recalled when it is retrieved in the parsed constituency tree structure and
correctly grounded in the image. CCRR is the recall rate of all the critical concepts.
3	Contrastive Language-Image inside-Outside Recursive
Autoencoder
In this section, we design a novel VL grammar induction method, CLIORA , to construct a shared
constituency structure for paired vision-language inputs. We start by briefly introducing our ba-
sis model DIORA (Drozdov et al., 2019) in Section 3.1. Then we present in detail our proposed
CLIORA from modeling in Section 3.2, through inference in Section 3.3 to objective and learning
in Section 3.4.
3.1	Background
Detailed Formulation of VL Structure Following Lafferty (2000); Drozdov et al. (2020), we
adopt an indexing scheme for the constituency VL structure, and use a two-dimensional n X n chart
1In a usual grammar induction setting, the constituent (span) corresponds to a sequence of words. Here we
reuse the conventional name but expand it to a pair of language span and aligned visual region.
2We do use a pre-trained object detector to obtain box regions, as is common in the phrase grounding litera-
ture. For a fully unsupervised setting, this could be replaced by a generic object proposal method (e.g., Uijlings
et al. (2013)), combined with features trained with self-supervision (Jaiswal et al., 2021).
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
—>
Language
Vision
Feature Extraction
Structure Construction
Loss
Vision-Language
Reconstruction Loss
Caption
Outside PaSS
Rec.
Xi
A man pushes a
boy on a zip line .
GT
A
man
pushes
:∖ 产 PUShes
X4
a
Contrastive Loss
Fine-Grained Feature
man
Inside PaSS :
pushes
Score-level
Fusion
Word Embedding	FeatUre-level
Fusion *- A
Attn /
Faster
R-CNN
⅛7+7*v⅛

Figure 2: Diagram of CLIORA. The Feature Extraction module prepares the language and image features.
The feature-level fusion enhances the language feature with visual cues. The Structure Construction module
recursively computes the VL representation for constituents with feature-level fusion. Finally, the score-level
fusion promotes the cross-modal fine-grained correspondence, leveraging the supervisory signal of the image-
caption pairs.
T storing the intermediate representations while computing the spans of the VL structure. Cell pi, jq
in the chart contains all scores and vectors of span Cij. For each 1 ≤ i < k < j ≤ n, span (i,j) can
be decomposed in spans pi, kq and pk ` 1,jq. Each span ci,j in the tree is associated with an inside
score siijn and inside vector hiijn P RD computed from bottom up (inside pass in next paragraph); as
well as an outside score siojut and outside vector hiojut P RD from top down (outside pass), with D
the feature dimension. The inside vector captures information of the inner content of the span, while
the inside score assesses to what extent the span forms a phrase with complete semantics. Likewise,
the outside score siojut and outside vector hiojut represent the contextual cues not in span ci,j .
DIORA Deep Inside-Outside Recursive Autoencoder (DIORA) (Drozdov et al., 2019) aims to
induce the language grammar and produce the constituency tree parser in an encoder-decoder frame-
work. Different from context-free grammars, DIORA mitigates the strong context-freeness assump-
tion by computing each span’s representation and spans’ composition possibility dependent on the
context. DIORA operates like a masked language model since it models the context of a missing
word and then reconstructs this missing word using the context as clue.
Formally, DIORA encodes the input sentence x in the shape of a constituency tree. Since the ground-
truth tree structure is not given, all possible valid trees are considered simultaneously, with weights,
using dynamic programming similar to the inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979). In the bottom-up
inside pass, the encoder recursively runs an inside pass through all spans and computes the inside
vector hii,nj and inside score sii,nj for each constituent ci,j . The combined constituent is obtained
by weighted summation of all possible pairs split by k P ri, jq. Similarly, the decoder performs a
top-down outside pass, recursively computing the outside score sio,ujt and outside vector hio,ujt with
k P p1, i ´ 1s Y rj ` 1, nq. In this way, the bottom-most vectors in the outside pass hio,uit encode the
context of the entire sentence x except for the i-th word. During inference, the predicted tree with
the maximum inside scores is obtained with the CKY algorithm (Kasami, 1966; Younger, 1967).
3.2	Modeling
Figure 2 illustrates the overall workflow, including visual/textual feature extraction, feature-level
fusion, structure construction, score-level fusion, and the loss function module. The whole fusion
process can be classified in feature-level (combining features vectors from different modalities) and
score-level (combining the scores).
Feature Extraction For visual feature extraction, previous works on visually-grounded grammar
induction often use only the global image feature (e.g., global output feature in Shi et al. (2019);
Zhao & Titov (2020b); Zhang et al. (2021)) as additional information. The detailed information
from the image at region level, which is helpful in building the fine-grained VL correspondence, is
ignored. Instead, we explore different aspects of visual features. In particular, we use an external
object detector to generate a set of object proposals O “ tomumM“1, where om P R4 denotes an
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
image region (RoI). Similar to Wang et al. (2020b), for each om, we compute its conv-features and
project it to a vector vm P RD with the same dimension D as the span features. For textual features,
following Drozdov et al. (2019), we use a pretrained word embedding wi P RD to initialize all the
words xi in sentence x. For more details c.f. Experiments Section.
Feature-level Fusion The feature-level fusion strategy fuses the visual and language features, at
different stages in our pipeline 3 4: at the very start using the word embeddings wi , as well as during
the recursive structure construction (described below), using the inside vectors hii,nj . Denote vi,j
as the visual representation corresponding to span ci,j . This is obtained by adopting an attention
mechanism on the object features tvmumM“1. In detail, we first compute the attention scores between
hii,nj and each vm, then normalize the scores and obtain vi,j by weighted summation over all object
features. Finally, we enhance the span features hii,nj by fusing the visual information vi,j .
Atti,j,m “ Softmax{(vm)Thij};	Vi,j “ X Attij,m ∙ Vm；	hij = norm(hij ' Y ∙ Vi,j)
m
(1)
where γ is a weight value for fusion and norm is L2 normalization.
Structure Construction Inspired by DIORA, we use an autoencoder model to integrate the visual
information and employ the inside pass and outside pass to fill in the chart T. During the inside
pass, for the leaf nodes, the scores sii,ni are set to 0 and the span features hii,ni are initialized with the
normalized word embeddings norm(wi). During the outside pass, for the root node, the outside
score s1o,unt is set to 0 and the language feature h1o,unt is initialized randomly independent of x. Then
the inside-outside algorithm is employed to recursively calculate the scores sii,nj , sio,ujt and vectors
hii,nj , hio,ujt .
Inside Pass The encoder is a bottom-up flow running an inside pass through all spans in the input
sentence x. It computes hij and Sij for each span Cijto fill up each cell (i,j) in the chart T as
shown in Figure 2. We start by computing items for each decomposition (i, k) and (k ` 1, j).
T
hij,k “ f (hhik h%,j)	sij,k = (hhin) W(hkk,j) + Sink + s%,j	⑵
where f is a composition function to merge the two spans (we use two linear layers with
ReLU as activation function) and W are trainable parameters to compute the composition scores.
hij is obtained by weighted summation over all possible pairs with the normalized Sirj 卜 “
Soft maxk tSii,nj,ku:
bin 一	V hin	. Zin	Qin	— V Qin	. ^n	nʌ
hi,j	乙 hi,j,k	si,j,k	Sij 2-∣ si,j,k si,j,k	(3)
kk
Then we fuse the visual information into hii,nj to obtain hii,nj using Equation 1. hii,nj in turn acts as a
sub-span to recursively produce bigger spans, e.g., hij`i, hi´i,j`i etc., until h^.
Outside Pass The decoder performs a top-down outside pass, computing the outside scores Sout
and the outside vectors hio,ujt by aggregating the inside representation and outside representation with
the outside algorithm. k p (1,i — IsYrj + 1, n). Take k > j as an example4:
houtk “ f (houkt, hj'ι,k)	Soutk = (ho,ut)TWphj'ι,k) + Sout + Sj'l,k	(4)
We use the same composition function f and score weight W as the inside pass. The computation
of the outside score Sio,ujt and outside feature representation hio,ujt is similar to the inside pass with
SSio,uj,tk = Softmaxk tSio,uj,tk u:
out V out out	out V out out
hi,j = Z-I hi,j,k Sij,k	Sij = ʌl Si,j,k Sij,k	(5)
kk
In this way, the bottom-most vectors in the outside pass hio,uit encode the context of entire sentence
x except for the i-th word.
3We explain it here for the latter case only. For the word embeddings, the procedure is basically the same.
4If k V j, the procedure is similar. Please refer to the Appendix D for more details.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Score-level Fusion Finally, we fuse the span scores with visual similarity scores to obtain the
input for our contrastive learning (detailed in Section 3.4). For this, we multiply the span score
qpci,j , xq (calculated using inside scores and outside scores, see below) with a similarity score
simpI, ci,jq, indicating the semantic similarity between span ci,j and the image I. This results
in a distance between image I and span ci,j , that incorporates the VL structure information:
dPl,Ci,jq “ SimpI,Ci,j) X q(ci,j, x).
Similarity Score Following Wang et al. (2020b), We first compute the similarity score ai,j,m be-
tween each span Cij and each image region om, then we select the image region with the highest
similarity score, and use that score as similarity for the entire image:
ai,j,m “ vm phi,nj ` hio,uj )	simpI, ci,j ) “ mmaxtai,j,m u	(6)
Note how ai,j,m is calculated using both inside and outside feature vectors.
Similar to simpI, ci,j ), which computes similarity at the span-level, we can also compute simi-
larity scores at word level based on the original word embeddings: aiw,m “ vmT wi. Analogically,
simw pI, xi) “ maxm taiw,m u then represents the similarity between a word and the entire image.
Span Score qpci,j, x) reflects how likely the span ci,j exists given x. In conventional
PCFG (MiChaeL 2011), since each span in the sentence is assigned to a non-terminal symbol, the
marginal of the span ci,j is the summation over all non-terminal symbols. In CLIORA , we do not
work with discrete symbols for the spans. Instead, we define qpci,j, x) “ Si j ∙ Sout∕s1nn. This is
inspired by PCFG (please refer to the Appendix E for more details).
3.3 Inference
In the inference stage, the language tree structure {%} is predicted with the maximum inside
scores using the CKY algorithm (Drozdov et al., 2019) on chart T, and then the VL structure
y* “ {(%, bΓj)} is obtained by aligning each span % to an image region b*
When a meaningful phrase (ground-truth constituent) p “ txk : k P ri, jsu is given (e.g., for
the visual grounding task), we predict its image region tomp u with a voting mechanism. We use
i,j
ak,m “ akw,m ` ak,k,m (where akw,m and ak,k,m are defined in the Similarity Score paragraph above)
as the matching score to select the most representative word xk* in P with the maximum ak,m, and
take the box region oιmρ based on the xk* with maximum matching score as p's grounding result:
k* “ arg max max ak m	mp - “ arg max ak* m	(7)
i≤k≤j m ,	,j	m ,
When the meaningful phrase is not given, we can still predict the grounding region omc of an
arbitrary span ci,j. In that case, apart from ak*,m in Equation 7, we consider the RoI-span matching
scores ai,j,m (defined in Similarity Score paragraph) to predict the aligned box omc . This allows
to assess how meaningful this span is given the visual information. The box region of ci,j is then:
mi,j “ arg maxpak* ,m ` ai,j,m)
(8)
In Experiments Section, we adopt the first case in “Lateral Evaluation on Weakly-supervised Visual
Grounding”. In “Frontal Evaluation on VL Grammar Induction”, we use the second case and obtain
the grounding region b" “ om^ § for each predicted span Cj, since we do not have given ground-
truth phrases as supervision.
3.4 Objective and Learning
Loss for Structure Construction As mentioned in Structure Construction module, the bottom-
most vectors in the outside pass hio,ui t encode the context of the entire sentence x except for the
i-th word. With the hypothesis that visual cues help to predict the missing words, CLIORA takes a
self-supervised blank-filling objective as follows:
Lrec “ ―： Σ kg PpXi∣hoUt)	(9)
xiPx
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Loss for Contrastive Learning We design our contrastive learning strategy based on maximizing
the matching score between paired RoI-span elements instead of a coarse Image-span matching Zhao
& Titov (2020a) or RoI-sentence matching (Wang et al., 2020b). Behind this design, our motivation
is that compared with a whole sentence, a short span is more likely to find a corresponding RoI that
can construct a strong negative pair to enhance contrastive learning. The same holds for the RoI
compared with the whole image. Particularly, for each span ci,j in a caption sentence, all the other
images except for the corresponding image I in the current batch are negative examples. We can
define the following lspanpI, ci,j q and lword pI, xiq in the batch:
lspanpI, ci,jq “ rdpI, c1i,j q ´ dpI, ci,j q ` s` ` rdpI1, ci,j q ´ dpI, ci,j q ` s`
lword pI, xiq “ ´ log
esimwpI,xiq
V -	esimwpI,Xi)
乙IPbatCh e
(10)
(11)
where []` “ max(0, ∙), e is the positive margin, and variables with 1 are negative examples in a
batch. A small lspan means an aligned span-image pair that is closer than any unaligned ones in a
batch. Then we obtain the contrastive learning loss:
LCl “ Eppy|xq )；Ispan pI, ci,j q `
)；lwordp1,xiq “〉； lspanpI, ci,j q `
)；lwordpI, Xiq
Ci,j Py
xiPx
Ci,j Px
xiPx
(12)
where y is a valid tree for the sentence x. Finally, the total loss is defined as:
LCLIORA “ λ , Lrec ' p1 ´ λq , Lcl
(13)
where λ is a hyper-parameter representing the trade-off between the two losses.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setting
Datasets We evaluate our method on the Flickr30k
Entities (Plummer et al., 2017) and MSCOCO (Lin
et al., 2014) datasets. Flickr30K Entities contains
29783 images for training, 1,000 images for valida-
tion and 1,000 for test. We use the same split of
MSCOCO as Zhao & Titov (2020b), which contains
82,783 training images, 1,000 validation images, and
1,000 test images. Each image is associated with 5
sentence descriptions for both Flickr30k Entities and
MSCOCO datasets. Following Shi et al. (2019);
Zhao & Titov (2020b), we filter words using the oc-
curring frequency in the training set and build a vo-
cabulary with size 10,000 for both Flickr30K Enti-
ties and MSCOCO. All sentences are converted to
lowercase, discarding non-alphanumeric characters.
Preprocessing Following MAF (Wang et al.,
2020b), for an input image, we use an external object
detector, Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015), to gener-
ate object proposals and extract their visual features.
Following Wang et al. (2020b), for each proposal,
we use RoI-Align (He et al., 2017) and global aver-
age pooling to compute its conv-feature and embed
		MSCOCO Flickr30k
Only Language	
Left branch	15.1	13.4
Right branch	51.0	1.7
Random	24.2±0.3	15.4±0.2
C-PCFG*	53.6±4.7	25.7±2.6
DIORAt	53.4±0.6	46.4±0.9
DIORA	58.0±0.7	54.3±2.0
Visually-Grounded
VG-NSL	50.4±0.3	-
VG-NSL+HI	53.3±0.2	-
VC-PCFG*	59.3±8.2	26.3±2.1
Vision-Language (VL)
CLIORAt	56.2±0.7	53.1±1.8
CLIORA	60.8±0.8	56.6±1.7
Table 1: Grammar induction for language.
Corpus-level F1 on the Test Datasets. * means
we re-implement the results on Flickr30k dataset
as Zhao & Titov (2020b).? indicates We use ran-
domly initialized word embedding.
it to a vector. We follow Drozdov et al. (2019) and Wang et al. (2020a) and use ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018), and Glove embedding (Pennington et al., 2014) for MSCOCO and Flickr30k Entities,
respectively. For the ground-truth structure of the captions, we follow Shi et al. (2019) and Zhao &
Titov (2020a) to use predictions produced by Benepar (Kitaev & Klein, 2018).
Setting For all experiments, we report the average score along with the unbiased standard devia-
tions on four runs with different random seeds. We load DIORA as an initialization for CLIORA .
Other detailed hyper-parameters are provided in Appendix F.
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
	ACC
MAF*	50.4±0.1
CLIORA	52.5±0.7
Table 2: ACC on Flickr30k test
set.
4.2	Quantitative Results
Lateral Evaluation on Language Grammar Induction As shown in Table 1, we compare our
approach with two classes of strong baselines: language grammar induction and visually grounded
grammar induction. We use the corpus F1 as the metric. Our model outperforms the previous SOTA
approaches that use only language information and those incorporating visual cues. In particular,
CLIORA outperforms VC-PCFG by 1.5% corpus F1 score on MSCOCO dataset and 30.3% corpus
F1 score on Flickr30k dataset.
Notably, PCFG-based models (C-PCFG and VC-PCFG) perform poorly on Flickr30k, while they
work well on MSCOCO. Meanwhile, two classic baselines “Right branching” and “Left branch-
ing” perform very differently on MSCOCO and Flickr30k. We posit these phenomena are due
to the different data distributions of MSCOCO and Flickr30k (See Figure 11 in Appendix). In con-
trast, CLIORA displays a more even performance across different corpora than PCFG-based models,
which reveals its robustness across corpora.
Lateral Evaluation on Weakly-supervised Visual Grounding
We evaluate our approach on weakly-supervised visual ground-
ing task and compare CLIORA with current SOTA method MAF5.
MAF only considers the ROI-word matching score aiw,m as in Equa-
tion 7, while CLIORA leverages this ROI-word matching score as
well as the context-aware RoI-span matching score ai,i,m in score-
level fusion strategy. Not surprisingly, we observe a significant im-
provement by 2.1% ACC on Flickr30k, as shown in Table 2.
Frontal Evaluation on VL Grammar Induction In addition to
the indirect lateral evaluations described above, we also directly as-
sess the VL structure we obtained on the frontal evaluation met-
ric CCRR. Our baseline adopts DIORA for grammar induction and
MAF for span grounding (as described in Equation 7). CLIORA incorporates the cross-modal
matching from the original word-region similarities and hierarchical RoI-span correspondence. Ta-
ble 3 shows that our jointly learned VL structure outperforms the baseline with a large margin (2.6%
on CCRR).
	CCRR
Baseline	47.0±0.4
CLIORA	49.6±0.9
Table 3: CCRR on Flickr30k
test set.
4.3	Ablation Study on Fusion Strategy
FLF	SLF	C-F1
-	-	54.3+2.0
X	-	56.1+2.1
-	X	55.9+2.4
X	X	56.6+1.7
Table 4: Results on Flickr30k test set. FLF:
Feature-Level Fusion. SLF: Score-Level Fusion.
In this section we study the effectiveness of our two
fusion strategies on language grammar induction:
the feature-level fusion (FLF) to enhance feature
representation and score-level fusion (SLF) to build
structural cross-modal correspondence and provide
regularization on meaningful spans. We leave out
lword because the empirical study shows that it
hardly affects the F1 score. As show in Table 4, FLF,
which augments the language representation with vi-
sual context cues, is capable of improving the constituency parsing result with 1.8% on Corpus-F1.
In addition, SLF takes advantage of RoI-span matching signal to supervise the learning ofVL struc-
ture and benefits the grammar induction result with 1.6% on Corpus-F1. When simultaneously
combining FLF and SLF, we observe a further improvement on the final result.
4.4	Analysis on Span Lengths and Labels
In details, we show the recall rate on six frequent constituent labels on Flickr30k Dev set, as well
as Corpus F1 (CF1) and Sentence F1 (SF1) in Figure 3. Our model exhibits a general boost across
constituent labels. Specifically, it is most accurate on ADJPs and ADVPs and works fairly well on
PPs. We contribute this improvement to the benefits of using contextual semantics.
5MAF* indicates we use the same feature extractor and learning strategy as MAF. As the ground-truth noun
phrase is only given in the inference stage, we use the corresponding region of the most representative word as
the prediction of the phrase, which results in a lower number than the original paper.
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Next, we analyze model performance on Flickr30k Dev set for constituents of different lengths in
Figure 4. Surprisingly, CLIORA enhanced by image generally its non-visual version (i.e., DIORA)
on not only short phrases but also longer phrases. As claimed in VC-PCFG, visual information are
beneficial for short spans but performs poorly on longer ConstitUents(25). Our model goes a step
further in multi-modal fusion, proving that multi-modal fusion is still promising.
80
60
3 40
20
0
□	Left Branching
□	Right Branching
□	Random
□	DIORA
□	CLIORA
NP	VP	PP	SBAR	ADJP	ADVP	CF1	SF1
8.4	8.27	10.47	8.35	16.23	7.11	12.63	13.95
2.58	2.22	1.16	2.09	1.75	2.54	1.57	2.14
15.81	15	12.79	15.76	18.45	14.21	14.25	15.18
63.38	63.28	61.63	63.83	67.48	60.91	51.19	51.6
68.64	69.67	60.47	67.46	70.05	66.5	54.32	54.84
PHRASE LABEL
Figure 3: Recall on different constituent label.
100
♦ Left Branching
80
60
40
20
0
2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17
CONSTITUENT LENGHTH
Figure 4: Recall on different constituent length.
(a) Good Case
(b) Bad Case
Figure 5: Case Study. RoIs and spans without special marks are predicted correctly.
5 Limitation and Future Work
Although inspiring results have been achieved by CLIORA (See Figure 5(a) and Appendix H for
success examples), the unsupervised VL grammar induction is far from satisfaction. Figure 5(b)
demonstrates a typical failure case that wrongly predicts a span “a green” that should be “green
shirt” in the ground-truth tree. This erroneous span is wrongly grounded to a large region containing
a “green building”. Interestingly, after combining more contexts and constituent a bigger span “a
green shirt”, the grounding result is modified to a correct region (green rectangle). This failure case
reveals the importance of appropriately modeling contextual semantics, which highlights the major
challenge of our proposed task and is calling for future research for better contextual models.
Moving forward, what is the best way of modeling such shared structure for VL grammar induction?
A promising extension could be to explore the visual structure to regularize the shared VL grammar.
It is worth noting that the visual images also contains enriched spatial and semantic structures (Si &
Zhu, 2011; Zhao et al., 2017) which could be aligned with the constituency trees. Leveraging such
structures may also be beneficial in producing a more meaningful shared structure.
Going back to the motivation of our work, how do humans model and process multimodal infor-
mation with such shared space? This work provides a potential answer with respect to grammar
induction and phrase grounding. Nevertheless, the debate between using dense vectors and sym-
bolic structures in human’s cognitive computational models has never been stopped (Tang et al.,
2019). This mystery also leaves us a wide space to explore other potential explanations in modeling
human’s multimodal “shared world”.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge funding from Flemish Government under the Onderzoeksprogramma Artificiele
Intelligentie (AI) Vlaanderen programme. This work has also been supported by the ERC project
101021347 KeepOnLearning. We thank Yanpeng Zhao for helpful suggestions on this work.
Ethics S tatement
Hereby, we consciously assure that our study is original work which has not been previously pub-
lished elsewhere, and is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere. Our study doesn’t
have any threats to health, safety, personal security, and privacy. We do not have ethics risks as
mentioned in the author guidelines.
Reproducibility S tatement
All the codes, processed data, and the trained model in this paper are publicly released at
https://github.com/bobwan1995/cliora.git. We use two public datasets: MSCOCO and Flickr30k
Entities. We use the same split of MSCOCO dataset as VC-PCFG (Zhao & Titov, 2020b) and use
their ground-truth tree structure annotation. We generate the ground-truth tree structure as VC-
PCFG with Kitaev & Klein (2018) for Flickr30k Entities dataset. We re-implement the experiment
results of CPCFG and VC-PCFG on Flickr30k Entities dataset in Table 1 with the same codes as
VC-PCFG (Zhao & Titov, 2020b).
References
Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and
Lei Zhang. Bottom-up and top-down attention for image captioning and visual question answer-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 6077-6086, 2018.
James K Baker. Trainable grammars for speech recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 65(S1):S132-S132, 1979.
Mathieu Bourguignon, Martijn Baart, Efthymia C Kapnoula, and Nicola Molinaro. Lip-reading en-
ables the brain to synthesize auditory features of unknown silent speech. Journal of Neuroscience,
40(5):1053-1065, 2020.
Gemma A Calvert, Edward T Bullmore, Michael J Brammer, Ruth Campbell, Steven CR Williams,
Philip K McGuire, Peter WR Woodruff, Susan D Iversen, and Anthony S David. Activation of
auditory cortex during silent lipreading. science, 276(5312):593-596, 1997.
Ruth Campbell. The processing of audio-visual speech: empirical and neural bases. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 363(1493):1001-1010, 2008.
Kan Chen, Jiyang Gao, and Ram Nevatia. Knowledge aided consistency for weakly supervised
phrase grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Noam Chomsky. On certain formal properties of grammars. Information and control, 2(2):137-167,
1959.
Andrew Drozdov, Pat Verga, Mohit Yadav, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum. Unsupervised
latent tree induction with deep inside-outside recursive autoencoders. In Proceedings of the An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), 2019.
Andrew Drozdov, Subendhu Rongali, Yi-Pei Chen, Tim O’Gorman, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew Mc-
Callum. Unsupervised parsing with s-diora: Single tree encoding for deep inside-outside recur-
sive autoencoders. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Tanmay Gupta, Arash Vahdat, Gal Chechik, Xiaodong Yang, Jan Kautz, and Derek Hoiem. Con-
trastive learning for weakly supervised phrase grounding. In European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Wenjuan Han, Yong Jiang, and Kewei Tu. Dependency grammar induction with neural lexicalization
and big training data. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing,pp. 1683-1688, 2017.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings ofthe
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
Yining Hong, Qing Li, Song-Chun Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Vlgrammar: Grounded grammar in-
duction of vision and language. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2021.
John E Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D Ullman. Introduction to automata theory, lan-
guages, and computation. Acm Sigact News, 32(1):60-65, 2001.
Ashish Jaiswal, Ashwin Ramesh Babu, Mohammad Zaki Zadeh, Debapriya Banerjee, and Fillia
Makedon. A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning. Technologies, 9, 2021.
Tadao Kasami. An efficient recognition and syntax-analysis algorithm for context-free languages.
Coordinated Science Laboratory Report no. R-257, 1966.
Anne Keitel, Joachim Gross, and Christoph Kayser. Shared and modality-specific brain regions that
mediate auditory and visual word comprehension. ELife, 9:e56972, 2020.
Yoon Kim, Chris Dyer, and Alexander Rush. Compound probabilistic context-free grammars for
grammar induction. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), 2019a.
Yoon Kim, Alexander M. Rush, Lei Yu, AdhigUna Kuncoro, Chris Dyer, and Gabor Melis. UnsU-
pervised recurrent neural network grammars. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio
(eds.), Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp. 1105-1117. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2019b.
Ryan Kiros, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Richard S. Zemel. Unifying visual-semantic embeddings
with multimodal neural language models. arXiv, 2014.
Nikita Kitaev and Dan Klein. Constituency parsing with a self-attentive encoder. In Proceedings
of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 2676-2686,
2018.
Noriyuki Kojima, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Alexander Rush, and Yoav Artzi. What is learned in visu-
ally grounded neural syntax acquisition. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 2615-2635, 2020.
Adhiguna Kuncoro, Lingpeng Kong, Daniel Fried, Dani Yogatama, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, and
Phil Blunsom. Syntactic structure distillation pretraining for bidirectional encoders. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 8:776-794, 2020.
John D Lafferty. A derivation of the inside-outside algorithm from the EM algorithm. IBM TJ
Watson Research Center, 2000.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
Dollar, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 740-755. Springer, 2014.
Yongfei Liu, Bo Wan, Xiaodan Zhu, and Xuming He. Learning cross-modal context graph for visual
grounding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2020.
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Yongfei Liu, Bo Wan, Lin Ma, and Xuming He. Relation-aware instance refinement for weakly
supervised visual grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Lin Ma, Zhengdong Lu, Lifeng Shang, and Hang Li. Multimodal convolutional neural networks for
matching image and sentence. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV),pp. 2623-2631, 2015.
Collins Michael. Probabilistic context-free grammars. In NLP course note, 2011.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pp. 1532-1543, 2014. 
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Marilyn A. Walker,
Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent (eds.), Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp. 2227-2237. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi: 10.18653/v1/n18-1202. 
A Bryan Plummer, Liwei Wang, M Christopher Cervantes, C Juan Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier,
and Svetlana Lazebnik. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer
image-to-sentence models. IJCV, 123:74-93, 2017.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time ob-
ject detection with region proposal networks. In Workshop on Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015.
Anna Rohrbach, Marcus Rohrbach, Ronghang Hu, Trevor Darrell, and Bernt Schiele. Grounding
of textual phrases in images by reconstruction. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2016.
Yikang Shen, Zhouhan Lin, Chin-wei Huang, and Aaron Courville. Neural language modeling by
jointly learning syntax and lexicon. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2018.
Yikang Shen, Shawn Tan, Alessandro Sordoni, and Aaron Courville. Ordered neurons: Integrating
tree structures into recurrent neural networks. International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), 2019.
Haoyue Shi, Jiayuan Mao, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen Livescu. Visually grounded neural syntax ac-
quisition. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pp. 1842-1861, 2019.
Zhangzhang Si and Song-Chun Zhu. Unsupervised learning of stochastic and-or templates for ob-
ject modeling. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV
Workshops), pp. 648-655. IEEE, 2011.
Emma Strubell, Patrick Verga, Daniel Andor, David Weiss, and Andrew McCallum. Linguistically-
informed self-attention for semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5027-5038, 2018.
Evelyn Tang, Marcelo G Mattar, Chad Giusti, David M Lydon-Staley, Sharon L Thompson-Schill,
and Danielle S Bassett. Effective learning is accompanied by high-dimensional and efficient
representations of neural activity. Nature neuroscience, 22(6):1000-1009, 2019.
J R Uijlings, K E Sande, T Gevers, and A W Smeulders. Selective search for object recognition.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2013.
Liwei Wang, Jing Huang, Yin Li, Kun Xu, Zhengyuan Yang, and Dong Yu. Improving weakly
supervised visual grounding by contrastive knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Qinxin Wang, Hao Tan, Sheng Shen, Michael Mahoney, and Zhewei Yao. MAF: Multi-
modal alignment framework for weakly-supervised phrase grounding. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
2030-2038, Online, November 2020a. 
Qinxin Wang, Hao Tan, Sheng Shen, Michael W Mahoney, and Zhewei Yao. Maf: Multimodal
alignment framework for weakly-supervised phrase grounding. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020b.
Songlin Yang, Yanpeng Zhao, and Kewei Tu. Neural bi-lexicalized PCFG induction. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
2688-2699, Online, August 2021. 
Quanzeng You, Jiebo Luo, and Zhengyou Zhang. End-to-end convolutional semantic embeddings.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5735-
5744, 2018.
Daniel H Younger. Recognition and parsing of context-free languages in time n3. Information and
control, 10(2):189-208, 1967.
Songyang Zhang, Linfeng Song, Lifeng Jin, Kun Xu, Dong Yu, and Jiebo Luo. Video-aided un-
supervised grammar induction. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp. 1513-1524, 2021.
Xingxing Zhang, Liang Lu, and Mirella Lapata. Top-down tree long short-term memory networks.
In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp. 310-320, 2016.
Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing
network. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 2881-2890, 2017.
Yanpeng Zhao and Ivan Titov. Visually grounded compound PCFGs. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
4369-4379, Online, November 2020a. 
Yanpeng Zhao and Ivan Titov. Visually grounded compound pcfgs. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4369-4379, 2020b.
Zilong Zheng, Wenguan Wang, Siyuan Qi, and Song-Chun Zhu. Reasoning visual dialogs with
structural and partial observations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6669-6678, 2019.
Hao Zhu, Yonatan Bisk, and Graham Neubig. The return of lexical dependencies: Neural lexicalized
pcfgs. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 8:647-661, 2020.
Appendix
A Related Work
Grammar Induction for Language Grammar Induction for Language, especially unsupervised
constituent parsing, is a fundamental task in Natural Language Processing that aims to capture syn-
tactic information in sentences in the form of a phrase-structure tree. The constituency structure
shows the process of analyzing the sentences by breaking down it into constituents. It finds its ap-
plications in semantic role labeling (Strubell et al., 2018) and word representation (Kuncoro et al.,
2020) and many other tasks. While grammar induction has a long history in computational linguis-
tics, previous studies are mostly limited to language domain with unannotated language corpora,
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
e.g., Michael (2011); Kim et al. (2019a); Drozdov et al. (2019; 2020); Shen et al. (2019; 2018);
Kim et al. (2019b). Recently, visually-grounded grammar induction, using visual images as percep-
tual experience of language, obtains increasing attention. Shi et al. (2019) first propose a visually
grounded neural syntax learner, and Kojima et al. (2020) find such model is potentially biased to-
wards concrete noun phrases. Then, more works (Zhao & Titov, 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021; Hong
et al., 2021) further exploit visual semantics derived from images to improve continuous vector rep-
resentations of language. Although these works get superior results on grammar induction, they
don’t consider building a unified vision and language structure.
Weakly-supervised Visual Grounding Weakly-supervised Visual Grounding aims to build the
fine-grained correspondence between language phrases and image regions with only image-caption
pairs as supervision. Current works (Rohrbach et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020b) typically start with generating a set of region
proposals from the input image by adopting an off-the-shelf object detector, and then formulate the
grounding task as a weakly-supervised matching problem between the phrases and the proposals.
GroundR (Rohrbach et al., 2016) built the cross-modal matching by reconstructing the input phrases
with an attention mechanism on the visual features of the proposals. KAC-Net (Chen et al., 2018)
took a similar pipeline but further utilized object categories as additional constraints and exploited
visual consistency for supervision. Besides, some approaches (Gupta et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2021) exploited knowledge distillation from the language models and visual models pre-trained
on an external corpus. RIR (Liu et al., 2021) explored the language structure from an external
language parser that provided additional relation constrain on the noun phrases (Liu et al., 2020),
and adopts a self-taught regression strategy to refine the box locations. MAF (Wang et al., 2020b)
used a simple but effective contrastive learning strategy for visual representation learning (Kiros
et al., 2014) and weakly-supervised visual grounding. VLGrammar (Hong et al., 2021) represents an
alignment between the constituents ofan image structure and language structure. Due to the separate
image grammar, segmentation parts should be provided in advance which hinders its application in
a broader domain.
B VL Structure Formulation
The VL structure is shown in Figure 6 (left). A shared vision-language constituency structure can
be decoupled into a language constituency tree for grammar induction (Figure 6 (bottom right)) and
grounding results for visual grounding (Figure 6 (top right)). From the visual angle, the structure
provides a hierarchy scene understanding.
During this natural decoupling process, no training or extra parameters are needed. It reveals that
building this VL structure requires the capability of structured prediction for single-modality along
with fine-grained alignment with heterogeneous modalities. Due to this reason, this task is chal-
lenging. Nevertheless, building this VL structure benefits each separate task and obtains superior
performance without using any extra annotations.
C	Task Formulation
Unsupervised VL grammar induction aims to induce a constituency grammar for both the caption
and the image that the caption describes simultaneously. The VL structure y given the caption x
is based on the constituency relations and defined as a 3-tuple G “ tN , Σ, Ru, where N is the
non-terminal nodes; Σ is a finite set of terminal nodes, namely words; R represents the production
rules including two classes of rules:
•	A → BC;	A,B,C P N,
•	A → x; A P N, X P Σ.
Each node A P N located in cell pi, jq is associated with a inside score siijn, outside vector hiijn for
the inside pass and outside score siojut, outside vector hiojut for the outside pass.
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Visual Grounding
a boy
zip-line
—∙ a zip-line
on a zip-line
Grammar Induction
Figure 6: Illustration of the VL structure. Left: VL structure. Left→Right: decoupling of the VL
structure. Bottom right: language constituency tree. Top right:grounding results. Different phrase
are allowed to be aligned to the same region.
man
a man
Figure 7: Detailed diagram of structure construction. The inside pass (left) and outside pass (right)
are illustrated. Structure construction is the process of filling the chart T. Rounds denote scores and
rectangles denote vectors. Orange and blue shows variables in the inside pass. Yellow and green
shows variables in the outside pass. Arrows refer to operations on data.
Inside Score
Inside Vetor
Outside Pass
D Structure Construction
We follow Lafferty (2000); Drozdov et al. (2020) to use an indexing scheme for the constituency
tree structure as shown in Figure 8. We use an autoencoder model to integrate the visual information
Figure 8: Inside pass and outside pass using the indexing scheme. For the inside pass (Left) two
spans ci,k and ek`i,j is composed as a bigger span. For the outside pass (Right), representation
of a target span Cij is recursively computed from the inside representation of c-i and outside
representation of ej`i,k and ck'i,n. k can appear to the left or right of the target span Ci,k. Here We
show k on the right. If k on the left, the indexing is adjusted.
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
and employ the inside pass and outside pass to fill in the n X n chart T. For leaf nodes, Sin “ 0
and hin “ normPwiq ' Y ∙ Ii,i with a normalization layer. For Root node, the outside score SoUt is
initialized as 0 and ho1u,nt is initialized randomly independent of x. Then inside-outside algorithm is
employed to recursively calculate the scores and vectors as shown in Figure 7.
InSide PaSS The encoder is a bottom-up flow by running an inside pass through all spans in the
input sentence x and computes the inside vector hii,nj and inside score Sii,nj for each constituent ci,j
to fill up each cell pi, jq in the chart T as shown in Figure 2. More formally, we first compute items
for each decomposition pi, kq and pk ` 1, jq.
T
hij,k “ f (h 联,h in+j q Sij,k “ Ph 襄 q W(h % ,j) + Srnk + ^k+ι,3	3)
where the matrix W and the weights in f are trainable parameters. Then the combined constituent
is obtained by weighted summation of all possible pairs with the normalized Sii,nj,k:
≡ij,k “	SOftkmaX	{sij,ku	hij	“ ∑	hij,k	∙	≡ij,k	Sij	“ ∑ Sij,k	- ≡ij,k	(15)
kk
OutSide PaSS In contrast, the decoder performs a top-down outside pass, computing the outside
score Sio,ujt and the outside vector hio,ujt by aggregating the inside representation and outside repre-
sentation with the outside algorithm.:
f((hoUt, h'ι,k)
"(hoj hkni´i)
k > j
k V i
(16)
Sout =∫(ho,Ut)τW(hj'ι,k) +Sout + Sjn~1,k k > j	(17)
ij，k“[(hkUt)TW(hkni—i) + SkUt + SkniT k V i	()
The computation of outside score Sio,ujt and outside feature representation hio,ujt is similar to the inside
pass:
驾k “ SOftkmaXtSoutk U	hoUt “ ∑ hoUtk ∙段k	Sout= ∑ Soutk ∙ Sj	(18)
kk
In this way, bottom-most vectors in the outside pass hio,ui t encodes the context of entire sentence x
except for i-th word.
E	Span Score
In PCFG, the marginal of the span ci,j is the conditional probability that is assigned after x is
taken into account. Inspired by this, we define q(ci,j , xq to measure how likely the span ci,j exists
given x. Since each span in PCFG is assigned to a non-terminal symbol, the marginal of the span
ci,j can be calculated using the summarization over all non-terminal symbols. However, due to
the continuous representation for each span for CLIORA , we define q(ci,j, xq similar to PCFG.
As shown in Figure 9, for PCFG since each span (namely, the string of words txi...xj u in the
sentence x = x1...xn is assigned to a non-terminal symbol A. The marginal (ie., posterior) of
the span p(ci,j|xq is the summarization over all non-terminal symbols A P N (N is the set of all
non-terminal symbols). The numerator of P(Cij,k(B → AC)|x) can be factorized as three parts:
inside scores aij(A), aj`i,k (C), outside score bkj(B), production rule P(B → AC). The product
of these three parts is finally divided by the partition function (the inside score of the whole sentence
a1,n.):
P(Cij k(B → AC)∣x) = aij(Aq∙ aj'i,k(Cq∙P(B→ ACq∙ bi,k(B)	(19)
, ,	a1,n
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Outside Score
ιnSd∙ Inside Score
A,B,C Nonterminal Symbol
Figure 9: Calculation of the marginal and the span score. Right: marginal ppci,j|xq of PCFG.
The marginal of span ci,j is a fraction and the numerator consists of three parts: inside scores
ai,j(A), aj`i,k pc) (shaded in blue), outside score bi,k(B) (shaded in gree ), production ruleP(B →
ACq. Left: span score qpci,j, xq of CLIORA . The numerator of qpci,j, xq can be factorized as two
parts: inside scores sii,nj (shaded in blue) and outside score sio,ujt (shaded in green). The product of
these two parts is finally divided by si1n,n .
λ	0.5
γ	0.5
# Epoch	10
Learning rate	1e ´ 5
Batch Size	64
Table 5: Hyper-parameters for CLIORA .
However, the non-terminal symbol is not assigned to spans for CLIORA. Hence, the span score of
span ci,j is defined as:
in out
q(Ci,j, X) = -2⅛nj	(20)
s1,n
where n is the length of the sentence X. i and j represent the begin and end positions of the span
in the sentence X, respectively. The numerator of q(ci,j , X) can be factorized as two parts: inside
scores sii,nj and outside score sio,ujt. The product of these two parts is finally divided by si1n,n.
F	Hyper-Parameters Setting
The model selection is based on the loss on the development dataset. More concretely, we compute
the average loss on the development set after each training epoch and select the model before the loss
starts to increase. We list the main hyper-parameters in Table 5, and others are default as DIORA.
G	Detailed Case S tudy
We visualize parse trees predicted by CLIORA in Figure 10. Left trees illustrate success cases and
right trees are failure cases. For the top right tree of the failed cases, CLIORA wrongly predicts two
spans “a green” and “a blue” that should be “green shirt” and “blue vehicle” in the ground-truth tree.
The erroneous span “a green” is wrongly grounded to a green building. However, because there
exists only one blue region, the erroneous span “a blue” is correctly grounded to the blue vehicle.
Interestingly, after combining more contexts and constituent a bigger span “in a green shirt”, the
grounding result is modified to a correct region. This fail case reveals the importance of contextual
semantics, which is an essential motivation of our task and model.
For the bottom right tree of the failed cases, CLIORA wrongly grounded the span “a boy and a girl”
to the region referring to only the boy. We speculate that this error is due to the binary trait of
the structure. “A boy” “and” and “a girl” should be combined simultaneously instead of wrongly
combined the first two phrases then combine the last one. We will leave this for further study.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
A woman walk in the sand as she carries her shoes
A boy in red sweatshirt pretends to drive a tractor
A
man in a green shirt is working under a blue vehicle
A boy and a girl swinging on a barrel
□.
Wrong Grounding
□.
Correct Grounding
,□,
Modified Grounding
ʌ
Wrong Span
ʌ
Correct Span
Figure 10:	Case Study. RoIs without rectangles and spans without special marks are predicted
correctly.
0.079	0.056	0.040	0.037	0.030	0.020	0.010
0.041	0.030	0.021	0.016	0.013	0.003	0.009
0.001	0.001	OQOo	0.000	0.0∞	0,0∞	0.0∞
0.034	0.026	0.014	0.011	0.011	0.003	0.006
0.029	0.020	0.012	0.009	0.010	0.006	0.004
0.002	0.001	0.001	0.001	0.0∞	0,0∞	0.0∞
0.250	0.1∞	0.050	0.040	0.020	0.010
0.010	0.010	0.030	0.030
0.040	0.090	0.050	0.020
0.000
0.010
0.000
OQOO
OQOO
0.0∞
0.000
0.000
0.0∞
OQOo
OQOo
OQOo
0.010
0.030	0.030	0.020
0.02□	0.010	0.010
0.0∞
0.0∞
0.0∞
0.0∞
0.0∞
0.0∞
0.000
0.000
0.0∞
Figure 11:	Label distribution over constituent length. The values in the cell denote frequencies of
different constituent lengths and phrase types. Left: Flickr30k. Right: MSCOCO.
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
H Ablation Study of Language and Image
We conduct an ablation study for contextual information and investigate the impact of image and
text. After gradually removing the components, the model exhibit consistent degradation.
We use different forms of visual information in
score-level fusion: global image information and
fine-grained ROI information. If we remove the
fine-grained information, which means the atten-
tion to the different ROIs are ignored and the av-
erage weight are used, the F1 score are even. It
demonstrates that for score-level fusion, the global
image information is enough. Additionally, to un-
derstand if the contribution of the visual compo-
	C-F1
^A∏	54.3
-Fine-grained ROI information	54.2
-Global image information	51.8
+Language Context	48.0
Table 6: F1 on Flickr30k development dataset.
nent to the overall model is analogy with the language context, we add the representation of the
whole sentence after removal of all visual information including fine-grained ROIs and the whole
image. As for this replacement, the performance decreases, demonstrating that visual information
can really helps in a compensation way, that is not restricted to providing contextual information
like language.
I	Robustness Across Corpora
As shown in Table 1, different models perform very differently on MSCOCO and Flickr30k. PCFG-
based models perform poorly on Flickr30k, while works well on MSCOCO. Two classic baselines
“Right branching” and “Left branching” perform completely opposite on MSCOCO and Flickr30k.
“Right branch” obtains a superior 51.0 F1 while “Left branch” only gets 15.1 on MSCOCO. “Right
branch” performs worse than “Right branch” on Flickr30k. We posit this phenomenon is due to the
diverse data distribution of MSCOCO and Flickr30k. To study this, we plot the detailed distribution
over constituent length for different phrase types in Figure 11. Flickr30k contains various phrase
types, e.g., PP, SBAR and ADJP and longer constituents. In contrast, CLIORA displays a more even
performance across different corpora than PCFG-based models, which reveals its robustness across
corpora.
19