Figure 1: (a) The structure of PDB 107L. The secondary structures are colored as: helices in red,beta sheets in yellow and loops in green. (b) The structure is rescaled to fit the 40A X 40A X 40Acubic box. (c) The box is discretized into voxels. (d) Features of each voxel are obtained from thestructure content of the voxel (bend/turn in blue).
Figure 2: The architecture of the model during the training and inference stages. (TrainingScheme): During training, the model includes three major components: (top) Sequence Encoder,(middle) Structure Encoder and (bottom) Sequence Decoder. The dashed arrows represent the pro-cess for getting cyclic loss. (Inference Scheme): During the inference, the model only needs thestructure encoder and the sequence decoder for decoding sequences. check here and the figureModel Architecture In the training stage, our model consists of three major components: a se-quence encoder: hs(∙), a structure encoder: hf (∙) and a sequence decoder: p(x∣h(∙)), as shown inFig. 2 (Left). Both sequence encoder and decoder are implemented using the vanilla transformermodel (Vaswani et al., 2017). The structure encoder contains 6 residual blocks followed by a 3Dpositional encoding. Each residual block has two 3D-convolutional layers (3 x 3 x 3) and batchnormalization layers. The 3D positional encoding is a simple 3D extension of the sinusoidal en-coding described in the vanilla transformer model, as shown in Appendix A. After the positionalencoding, the 3D vector is flattened to be 1D as the input of a transformer encoder. The length ofthe transformer input is fixed to be lf = 53 = 125. The output of the transformer encoder: hf (y) isthe latent fold representation of y .
Figure 3: (a). TM score distributions of RosettaDesign and Fold2Seq. (b). RUntimeofFold2Seqand RosettaDesign for generating one protein sequence: CPU: Intel Xeon E5-2680 v4 2.40GHz,GPU: Nvidia Tesla K80. (c). Avg. SeRR for the OD test set with a string of missing residues.
Figure 4: The distributions of ∆TM for two test sets.
Figure 5:	The native and designed structures with ∆TMi > 0. The IDs at the bottom are the CATHdomain names of each structure.
Figure 6:	The native and designed structures with ∆TMi < 0. The IDs at the bottom are the CATHdomain names of each structure.
Figure 7: The fold2seq loss(REf) curves of two training strategies on training and validation set.
Figure 8: The tSNE visualization of the averaged structure(fold) latent embeddings h after thestructure encoder of two methods on OD test set. Each protein is colored by its fold category. Samecolor indicates the same fold, except that gray points represent outliers, which is defined by its foldhaving < 5 proteins in the test set.
Figure 9: Avg. SeRR per fold for the ID test set.
