Figure 1: Method description of our training-free uncertainty estimation: apply infer-transformationT (left) and infer-noise or infer-dropout P (right) to a trained neural network F during inference.
Figure 2: Visualization of block-wise and pixel-wise uncertainty (variance) maps (log scale) generatedby infer-transformation, infer-dropout, MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), using SRGAN (Lediget al., 2017) for the super resolution task. L1 loss map (log scale) is also provided for comparison.
Figure 3: Visualization of pixel-wise uncertainty (variance) maps from infer-transformation, infer-dropout, MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) compared with the L1 loss map in depth estimationtask. Correlation between the L1 loss map and the uncertainty map is also presented.
Figure 4: Top: L1 loss of perturbed model for MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), infer-dropoutand infer-noise. Various dropout rates and noise levels have been evaluated. Location 0 is right afterthe input; location 1, 2, 3 are intermediate layers. Bottom: Correlation between error and variancewith different locations and perturbation strength. For infer-dropout, note that location 2 and 3 causeminimal increase in the L1 loss after perturbation (i.e. high tolerability), leading to high correlation.
Figure 5: Visualization of probability P(|Z - Y | ≥ t) and the upper bound V[Z]/(t - C)2 (only validwhen t ≥ C). The increasing area between curves (looser bound) is caused by the larger perturbationstrength (dropout rate), which violates the condition of tolerability (i.e. small C).
Figure 6: The first application using uncertainty map estimated in our methods to improve the qualityof SR results. We compare SR results that use L2 loss re-weighted by variance map (middle) andthat do not (right). HR (left) represents high resolution image. Results evaluated in Set 14.
Figure 7: Different locations for infer-noise and infer-dropout in SRGAN and SRresnet for superresolution. For each experiment, the noise or dropout is injected at a single location with oneperturbation level.
Figure 8: Different locations for noise or dropout injection in the FCRN model for depth estimation.
Figure 9: Evaluation on SRresnet model for super resolution. Top: The L1 loss of perturbed modelfor infer-dropout and infer-noise and baseline MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). Variousdropout rates and noise levels have been evaluated. Location 0 is right after the input; location 1, 2, 3are intermediate layers. Bottom: Correlation between error and variance with different locations andperturbation strength. Note that location 2 cause minimal increase in the L1 loss after perturbation(i.e., high tolerability), leading to high correlation for MC-dropout and infer-dropout.
Figure 10: Evaluation on FCRN model for depth estimation. Top: The L1 loss of perturbed model forinfer-dropout and infer-noise and baseline MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). Various dropoutrates and noise levels have been evaluated. Location 1, 2 are intermediate layers, location 3 is rightbefore the last convolutional layer. Bottom: Correlation between error and variance with differentlocations and perturbation strength. Note that location 1 and 2 cause minimal increase in the L1 lossafter perturbation (i.e., high tolerability), leading to high correlation for infer-dropout.
Figure 11: Left: The sparsification error plot using the mean of uncertainty and L1 loss of eachimage sample for infer-dropout and MC-dropout, the values of AUSE are also presented. Right: Thescatter plot using the mean of uncertainty and L1 loss of each image sample, the values of mean L1correlation are also presented.
Figure 12: Visualization of uncertainty maps (log scale) and error map (log scale) from infer-transformation, infer-dropout, infer-noise compared with the baseline MC-dropout, evaluated on theSRGAN model on Set14 dataset for super-resolution task.
Figure 13: Visualization of uncertainty maps and the error map from infer-transformation, infer-dropout, infer-noise compared with the baseline MC-dropout, evaluated on the FCRN model on NYUdepth dataset V2 for the depth estimation task.
