Figure 1: Regularities and exceptions in a binary chairs vs non-chairs problem. (b) illustration of consistencyprofiles. (c) Regularities (high C-scores) and exceptions (low C-scores) in ImageNet.
Figure 2: Consistency profiles oftraining examples. Each curve in thefigure corresponds to the average pro-file of a set of examples, partitionedaccording to the area under the profilecurve of each example.
Figure 3: (a) Top ranked examples in CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. (b) Bottom ranked examples with annotations.
Figure 4: (a) Histogram of CD 八 for each subset ratio on CIFAR-10. (b) Histogram of the C-scoreʌCD averaged over all subset ratios on 3 different data sets.
Figure 5: Examples from MNIST (blocks 1, 2), CIFAR-10 (blocks 3-6), and CIFAR-100 (blocks 7-10). Eachblock shows a single class; the left, middle, and right columns of a block depict instances with high, intermediate,and low C-scores, respectively.
Figure 6: (a) Rank correlation between integralC-score and the C-score for a particular subsetratio, s. The peak of each curve indicates thetraining set size that best reveals generalizationof the model. (b) Joint distribution of C-scoreper-class means and standard deviations on Ima-geNet. Samples from representative classes (?’s)are shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Example images from ImageNet. The 5 classes are chosen to have representative per-class C-scoremean-standard-deviation profiles, as shown in Figure 6a. For each class, the three columns show sampledimages from the (C-score ranked) top 99%, 35%, and 1% percentiles, respectively. The bottom pane shows thehistograms of the C-scores in each of the 5 classes.
Figure 8: Learning speed ofCIFAR-10 examples grouped byC-score. The thick transpar-ent curve shows the average ac-curacy over the entire trainingset. SGD achieves test accu-racy 95.14%, Adam achieves92.97%.
Figure 9: (a) Learning speed of CIFAR-10 examples grouped by C-score with SGD using constantlearning rate. The 4 learning rates correspond to the constants in the stage-wise scheduler in Figure 8a.
Figure 10: Examples from MNIST. Each block shows a single class; the left, middle, and rightcolumns of a block depict instances with high, intermediate, and low C-scores, respectively.
Figure 12: Examples from CIFAR-100. Each block shows a single class; the left, middle, and rightcolumns of a block depict instances with high, intermediate, and low C-scores, respectively. The first60 (out of the 100) classes are shown.
Figure 13:	Example images from ImageNet. For each class, the three columns show sampled images from the(C-score ranked) top 99%, 35%, and 1% percentiles, respectively. The bottom pane shows the histograms of theC-scores in each of the 5 classes.
Figure 14:	Example images from ImageNet. For each class, the three columns show sampled images from the(C-score ranked) top 99%, 35%, and 1% percentiles, respectively. The bottom pane shows the histograms of theC-scores in each of the 5 classes.
Figure 15: Spearman rank correlation be-tween C-score and distance-based score onhidden representations.
Figure 16: The Spearman’s ρ correlation between the C-score and the score based on LOF withdifferent neighborhood sizes.
Figure 17: Examples from CIFAR-10 (left 5 blocks) and CIFAR-100 (right 5 blocks). Each blockshows a single class; the left, middle, and right columns of a block depict instances with top,intermediate, and bottom ranking according to the relative local density score C±L in the input space,respectively.
Figure 18: Examples from CIFAR-10 (left 5 blocks) and CIFAR-100 (right 5 blocks). Each blockshows a single class; the left, middle, and right columns of a block depict instances with top,intermediate, and bottom ranking according to the relative local density score C±L in the latentrepresentation space of a trained network, respectively.
Figure 19: Learning speed of group of examples ranked by C-scores, with equal number (400) ofexamples in each group via subsampling.
Figure 20: The correlation of C-scores estimated with varying numbers of models (the x-axis) andC-scores estimated with 1,000 independent models. The simulations are run with CIFAR-10, and theerror bars show standard deviation from 10 runs.
