Figure 1: Left: a typical search process of the first-order DARTS, in which 200 search epochs areused. Red, green and blue lines indicate the average weight of none, the ratio of preserved skip-connect operators, and the re-training accuracy, respectively, with respect to the number of searchepochs. Right: the normal cell after 200 search epochs, in which all operators are skip-connect.
Figure 2: Top: the normal and reduction cells found in S1 with edge pruning, i.e., following theoriginal DARTS to search on full (14) edges. Middle & Bottom: the architecture found in S2with fixed and searched edges, in which red thin, blue bold, and black dashed arrows indicateskip-connect, sep-conv-3x3, and concatenation, respectively. This figure is best viewed in color.
Figure 3: The recurrent cell searched by ourapproach on the Penn Treebank dataset. Therandom seed is 3.
Figure 4: TWo search processes with a simple loss function L (ω, α; x) = (ω ∙ X - α)2, with all ofω, α and x being 1-dimensional scalars. Red, green and blue curves indicate the value of α, ω andthe validation loss, respectively.
Figure 5: The normal cells (in the standard DARTS space) obtained by different amending coefficients.
Figure 6: Top: the normal and reduction cells found in S3 with edge pruning. Bottom: the normaland reduction cells found in S3 with searched edges.
Figure 7: Top: the normal and reduction cells found by DARTS (test error: 6.18%). Middle: thenormal and reduction cells found by P-DARTS (test error: 5.38%). Bottom: the normal and reductioncells found by PC-DARTS (test error: 3.15%).
Figure 8:	Details of a search process of our approach in Si with 200 search epochs. Left: Red, greenand blue curves indicate the average weight of none, the ratio of preserved skip-connect operators,and the re-training accuracy, respectively (corresponding to Figure 1). Right: Red and yellow curvesindicate the validation accuracy of the super-network (in the search stage) searched by DARTS andour approach, and green and blue curves indicate the test accuracy (in the re-training stage) producedby the architectures found by DARTS and our approach, respectively.
Figure 9:	Architectures searched in S1 with pruned or fixed edges.
Figure 10: (Part I) Architectures searched in S? with searched or fixed edges, in which red thin,blue bold, and black dashed arrows indicate skip-connect, sep-conv-3x3, and channel-wiseconcatenation, respectively. Thisfigure is best viewed in color..
Figure 11: (Part II) Architectures searched in S2 with searched or fixed edges, in which red thin,blue bold, and black dashed arrows indicate skip-connect, sep-conv-3x3, and channel-wiseconcatenation, respectively. Thisfigure is best viewed in color..
Figure 12: Architectures searched in S3 .
