Figure 1: Visualization of state, reward and value maps of vPERL and VIN on Battle Zone game (thefirst row) and Breakout game (the second row).
Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed vPERL model.
Figure 3: Performance improvement of VPERL and baselines.
Figure 4: Average return vs. the number of simulation steps on Atari games. The solid lines showthe mean performance over five random seeds. The shaded area represents the standard deviationfrom the mean. The blue dotted line denotes the average return of the expert. The area above the bluedotted line indicates performance beyond the expert.
Figure 5: Visualization of state, VPERL reward map and GIRIL reward map for Atari games.
Figure 6: Average return vs. number of simulation stepson continuous control tasks.
Figure 7: Average return vs. number of demonstrations on Atari games and continuous control tasks.
Figure 8: Average return vs. number of the expert simulation steps (NE) on Atari games andcontinuous control tasks.
Figure 9: Average return vs. choices of K on Atari games and continuous control tasks.
Figure 10: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Battle Zone game. (a) The state, (b)the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 11: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Centipede game. (a) The state, (b)the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 12: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Seaquest game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 13: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Qbert game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 14: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Breakout game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 15: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Space Invaders game. (a) The state,(b) the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 16: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Kung-Fu Master game. (a) The state,(b) the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 17: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Battle Zone game. (a) The state, (b)the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 18: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Centipede game. (a) The state, (b)the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 19: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Seaquest game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 20: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Qbert game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 22: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Space Invaders game. (a) The state,(b) the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 21: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Breakout game. (a) The state, (b) thereward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
Figure 23: Visualization of state, reward map and value map on Beam Rider game. (a) The state, (b)the reward map and value map of vPERL, and (c) the reward map and value map of VIN.
