Figure 1: `2 adversarial perturbations ( = 6.0) for two target classes, bird and feline, on ImageNet-M10: (a,d) standard adversarial perturbations on a single image, (b,e) universal adversarial perturba-tions, and (c,f) zooming in on the most semantic patch.
Figure 2: A sample of `2 universal perturbations ( = 6.0) for all target classes on ImageNet-M10:we observe patterns resembling dog and cat (feline) faces, birds, outlines of cars and trucks, an insect,and mushrooms (fungus).
Figure 3: Local analysis of universal perturbations on ImageNet-M10: 64 random 80×80 patches areisolated and evaluated for their ASR. First column shows the original perturbation for the target class(top: '2; bottom: '∞); next five columns show three patches with the highest ASR, and two with thelowest. Top of each perturbation indicates its ASR on the test set. Patches are normalized.
Figure 4: Evaluation of translated adversarial and universal '2,'∞ perturbations for the target classbird on ImageNet-M10. We evaluate a subsampled grid with strides of four pixels. The value atcoordinate (i, j) represents the average ASR when the perturbations are shifted by i pixels right andj pixels up, with wraparound to preserve information; the center pixel at (0, 0) represents the ASR ofthe original unshifted perturbations. For universal perturbations, the ASR at each location is averagedover ten perturbations.
Figure 5: Scaling analysis of universal perturbations on ImageNet-M10: (a) we generate a universalperturbation (nat-univ-ptb) of `2 norm = 6.0 on a natural model (nat-model) for thetarget bird, and measure the sensitivity of the natural and a robust model (rob-model) at variousrescalings of the perturbation. We also generate a universal perturbation (rob-univ-ptb) of norm= 30.0 for the robust model and use it to show that the robust model does react to scalings ofsome perturbation. The same nat-univ-ptb is also evaluated on an independent natural model(nat-model-2) for control; (b) different cropped local patches of the same nat-univ-ptb arealso evaluated on the natural model; (c) visualizations of the cropped patches.
Figure 6: Comparing transferability of adversarial and universal `2 perturbations ( = 6.0): pertur-bations are generated on the source model (ResNet-18), then transferred to a different target model:(left) another ResNet-18 model trained from a different random initialization, and (right) a VGG16model.
Figure 7: Visualization of universal perturbations for target bird, computed over base sets of differentsize K . We observe that the visual quality improves with the size of the base set.
Figure 8: Sample images from each (super) class of ImageNet-M10.
Figure 9:	The learning dynamics of computing universal perturbation (epoch vs. training accuracy onthe base set) are shown across a selection of learning rates, batch sizes, and three intermediate valuesof K.
Figure 10:	Visualization of`2 universal perturbations at = 1.0 for a CIFAR-10 model. Optimizationon some classes (bird and cat) fail occasionally, and is reflected in their lack of semantic content.
Figure 11:	Visualization of `2 universal perturbations at = 6.0 for a full ImageNet model. Wehand-picked the classes with the most salient perturbations. Many of the perturbations possess visualcharacteristics identifiable with the corresponding class.
Figure 13: Visualization of '∞ universal perturbations at e = 8/255 for different target classes. Weobserve recognizable patterns for each class similar to those of `2 universal perturbations, but theremaining regions have much higher energy and different texture.
Figure 14: Locality analysis of `2 universal perturbations on ImageNet-M10. Each row shows theperturbation for the particular class, followed by three patches with highest ASR and two patcheswith lowest ASR; ASR is written above each patch.
Figure 15: Locality analysis of '∞ universal perturbations on ImageNet-MIO. Each row shows theperturbation for the particular class, followed by three patches with highest ASR and two patcheswith lowest ASR; ASR is written above each patch0.1020.1050.10520Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021with low signal that are similar in norm. However, it is not clear whether these low signal patchesfound by optimization serve some purpose. To test this, we experimented with zeroing-out thesepatches or replacing them with copies of patches with the highest ASR. Evaluation of the resultingperturbations show that the ASR is highest with these patches in place, and are in fact lowered whenwe replace them with patches with higher ASR. This suggests that these low signal patches have anon-linear interaction with rest of the perturbation, and are providing a small boost in signal whencombined with other patches. Understanding this phenomena in more depth may shed more light onthe differences between properties of '∞ and '2 universal perturbations.
Figure 16:	We evaluate attack success rates of translated adversarial and universal perturbations fordifferent target classes over the test set on CIFAR-10. There is no subsampling of the grid here as thedimensions are much smaller. We used a subsampled grid of all the possible offsets with strides offour pixels. As before, the value at coordinate (i, j) represents the average attack success rate whenthe perturbations are shifted by i pixels along the x-axis and j pixels along the y-axis, with wraparound to preserve information. Evaluation of adversarial perturbation is only shown for one target asit is redundant.
Figure 17:	Visualization of `2 universal perturbations for class feline, computed using differentinitializations (first row), and an additional penalty to encourage diversity (second row).
Figure 18:	Visualization of `2 universal perturbations for six individual sub-classes inside the birdclass. These were generated on a fine-grained model trained on the subclass labels (60 in total).
