Figure 1: Converting a directed graph G in (I) into undirected graphs using A + A> as shown in (II),AA> + A>A as shown in (III), and the proposed LGLG symmetrization as shown in (IV).
Figure 2: Runtime scalability for gre_1107 (left), big (middle), gre_115 (right)(a)	Generate an initial subgraph S from the original directed graph in O(m log n) or O(m +n log n) time;(b)	Compute the approximate dominant eigenvector ht and the spectral sensitivity of eachoff-subgraph edge in O(m) time;(c)	Recover a small amount of spectrally-dissimilar off-subgraph edges into the latest subgraphS according to their spectral sensitivities and similarities in O(m) time;(d)	Repeat steps (b) and (c) until the desired condition number or spectral similarity is achieved.
Figure 3: Edge coupling during directed Laplacian symmetrization.
Figure 4: Forming a directed Laplacian with B and C matrices.
Figure 5: The spectral sensitivity scores of off-subgraph edges (e2 to e19 in blue) for the undirected(left) and directed graph (right).
Figure 6: Largest generalized eigenvalue reduction rates for “gre_115" (left) and “pesa" (right).
Figure 7: GMRES convergence results for graphs of (a) pesa and (b) bigits generalized eigenvalues λi ≥ 1 on its diagonal. Since the errors can be calculated from thefollowing procedure:LGUy - LSUy = LGU (y - y) + (LGU - LSU )y = 0,	(34)we can write the error term as follows:(y - y) = LGU (LGU - LSU )y.	(35)Since y = Pi aiVi, the error can be further expressed as(y - y) = X ai(1 - λ1 )vi.	(36)iTherefore, the error term (36) can be generally considered as a combination of high-frequency errors(generalized eigenvectors with respect to high generalized eigenvalues) and low-frequency errors(generalized eigenvectors with respect to low generalized eigenvalues). After applying GS relaxations,the high-frequency error terms can be efficiently removed (smoothed), while the low-frequency errorstend to become zero if the generalized eigenvalues approach 1 considering (1 - ±) tends to beapproaching zero. As a result, the error can be effectively eliminated using the above solutionsmoothing procedure.
Figure 8: The correlation of PageRank between itself and its sparsifier for graph ibm_32 (left),mathworks_100 (middle) and gre_1107 (right) after smoothing7.5.2 Iterative method for directed Laplacian solverFigure 7 shows the relative residual plot (versus GMRES iteration number) when no preconditioneris applied, Incomplete LU factorization (ILU) as the preconditioner is applied, and the directedsparsifier Laplacian LS as the preconditioner is applied for graph pesa and big. We can conclude thatGMRES with directed sparsifiers as preconditioners has faster convergence rate than the other twomethods. It is also observed that the number of nonzeros (nnz) in the preconditioner matrix createdby the directed sparsifier is the lowest.
Figure 10: Spectral partitioning of directed (left) and undirected graphs (right). The nodes within thesame cluster are assigned the same color.
Figure 9: The correlation of personalized PageRank between itself and its sparsifier for graph ibm_32(left), mathworks_100 (middle) and gre_1107 (right) after smoothingthat a few steps of Gauss-Seidel smoothing have been applied to remove the high-frequency errorsto obtain the smoothed PageRank vectors when using the sparsified graphs. We observe that thePageRank vectors obtained from sparsifiers can well approximate the results computed with theoriginal graphs.
Figure 11: Eigenvalues distribution of LGU for the directed graph in Figure 10In this work, we propose a spectral method for directed graph partitioning problems. For an undirectedgraph, the eigenvectors corresponding to the first few smallest eigenvalues can be utilized for thespectral partitioning purpose (Spielman & Teng, 1996). For a directed graph G on the other hand,the left singular vectors of Laplacian LG will be required for directed graph partitioning. The18Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021eigen-decomposition of its symmetrization LGU can be wirtten asLGU = Xλivivi>,	(42)iwhere 0 = λ1 ≤ ...λk and v1, ..., vk, with k ≤ n denote the Laplacian eigenvalues and eigenvectors,respectively. There may not be n eigenvalues when there are some nodes without any outgoing edges.
Figure 12: The partitioning results between Gu (left) and its SParSifier Su (right) for the 'ibm32.mtx'graph.
