Figure 1: Schemes and Datasets: (a) Multi-branched architecture, task-specific branches on a top of a sharedbackbone. (b) Channel-wise modulation architecture, uses task vectors to modulate the feature maps along themain network. (c) Our architecture uses a top-down (TD) control network and modifies the featuremapsalong the recognition net (BU2) element-wise, according to the image and to the current task. (d) The internalstructure of the control network: image information, extracted by BU1, is combined with task informationand accumulated by the TD stream, to control the units along BU2. (e) Images examples with their correspondingtasks. upper part: M-MNIST, the task is to recognize all the digits, CELEB-A, example tasks are the classificationof a smile, sunglasses or earrings. lower part, left: CLEVR, an example task is to recognize the material of thecylinder to the right of the blue cube. right: CUB200, an example task is to identify the color of the bird’s neck.
Figure 2: (a) The model architecture. The model consists of three identical networks, BU1, TD, BU2 (e.g., eachone a Resent-18). BU1 and TD together constitute the TD-control network in figure 1c. The input consists of theinput image (to BU1, BU2), and a task specification at the top of TD. The flow in TD goes from top to bottom;the processing flows sequentially through BU1, TD, BU2, with final output at the top of BU2. (b,c) The lateralconnections implemented as 1x1 convolutions. Connections from BU1 to TD (b) are additive, from TD to BU2(c) are multiplicative.
Figure 3: Our architectureachieves higher performance fora similar number of parameters.
Figure 4: (a,b) Task selectivity. The columns in each plot are the selected task 4/9 locations, the rows arethe readout locations. With high selectivity, off-diagonal recognition will be at chance level. Our scheme(a, selectivity indices 26.5, 37.2) shows higher selectivity than the channel-modulation scheme (b, selectivityindices 8.3, 8.0). (c,d) Attention maps, as obtained at the end of the TD stream, highlighted with turquoise;intermediate objects of interest are well localized: (c) CUB-200: What is the color of the bird’s crown? (d)CLEVR: What is the shape of the object below the small metal object? Best viewed in color while zoomed-in.
