Figure 1: Synthetic data. Shown are conditional embeddings of synthetic data given resp. groundtruth labels for ctSNE and sLLE-1 (a,b), and euclidean distance for Confetti and Jedi (c,d).
Figure 2: Real world data. Embedded are the sum of chi-square matrices for color, local shape andtexture, boundary shape, and spatial petal distribution of the Oxford flower data. Shown are vanillatSNE (left), and Jedi (middle) and Confetti (right) with HSV color distances as prior knowledge.
Figure 3: Real World Data Visualizations of the embedding of single cell sequencing dataofUMAP,Confetti + UMAP, ctSNE, and sLLE-1. sLLE-1 failed to produce an embedding for the fulldata, results are obtained for a random subset of the data. Coloring in b), c), and d) according tobatch ID, shape according to sample type (case vs control, and blood vs CSF).
Figure 4: Visualization of the synthetic data set for parameter tuning based on tSNE. We see sampleswith the same colors clustered together (clustering planted in dimensions A) as well as samples withthe same shape (clustering planted in dimensions B).
Figure 5: Visualization of different distances for one sample from the pink cluster to all other sam-ples in the synthetic data set for parameter tuning.
Figure 6: Visualizations of the synthetic data set for parameter tuning by Jedi with a Euclideandistance prior based on the dimensions in A (color clusters). Here we compare the influence of thesmoothing parameters α and β .
Figure 7:	Visualizations of the synthetic data set for parameter tuning by Jedi with a Euclideandistance prior based on the dimensions in A (color clusters). We compare the effect of an increasingprior perplexity on both divergences determined by α.
Figure 8:	Visualizations of the synthetic data set for parameter tuning by Jedi with a Euclidean dis-tance prior based on the dimensions in A (color clusters). We see the effect of different perplexitiesin combination with different values for the mixture of divergences α.
Figure 9: Visualizations of the synthetic data set for parameter tuning by Confetti with a Eu-clidean distance prior based on the dimensions in A (color clusters). For two different perplexityvalues we increase the maximum penalty λ from 0.4 to 2.
Figure 10: Visualizations by sLLE-1 with labels prior based on the clusters in A (color). Theamount how much the distances are adjusted is determined by α and the number of neighbors toconsider is k.
Figure 11: Visualizations by ctSNE with a label prior based on the clusters in A (color). We trydifferent values for β which influences how strong the prior is factored out.
Figure 12: tSNE of synthetic data. Visualized is a tSNE plot for the synthetic data set using perplex-ity 50. Color corresponds to cluster assignment in dimension 1-8 and shape corresponds to clusterassignment in dimension 9-12.
Figure 13: JEDI and CONFETTI with label prior. Visualized are the plots generated by our methodswhen fed with the ground truth labels corresponding to the cluster assignment in the first 8 dimen-sions of the synthetic data set. Color corresponds to cluster assignment in dimension 1-8 and shapecorresponds to cluster assignment in dimension 9-12.
Figure 14: NOS score visualizations. Given are the NOS plots for prior labels and embedding (a)and non-prior dimensions 9-12 and embedding (b) on the synthetic data set. On the x-axis, theneighbourhood k is varied between 0% and 100% of data points, the y-axis is the NOS score.
Figure 15: NOS plot for flowers. Visualized is the NOS score for the Oxford flower data set forJEDI and CONFETTI against the prior. On the x-axis, the neighbourhood k is varied between 0%and 100% of data points, the y-axis is the NOS score.
Figure 16: Embedding of ctSNE and clustering according to marker genes. a) Visualized is theembedding obtained from ctSNE for the single cell data with our cluster labels as prior. The coloringis according to cell type. b) Dendogram of agglomerative clustering with complete linkage onmarker gene expression. A natural cutting point is at 1.8 (blue horizontal line), which retrieves thesame number of clusters as the orginal paper.
Figure 17: Additional SC embeddings. Visualized is the embedding of CONFETTI for the singlecell data with the tissue type (blood vs CSF) as prior with coloring according to cell labels (a),the embedding obtained from Jedi for the single cell data with marker gene expression as prior,with coloring is according to the cell labels (b), and the original UMAP embedding with coloringaccording to batch ID (c).
