Figure 1: Learning curves for deep RL algorithms With different exploration strategies on OPenAIMuJoCo continuous control tasks, where the top, middle and bottom row corresponds to results ofA2C, PPO, and SAC respectively. The solid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped regionrepresents half a standard deviation of the average return over 10 random seeds.
Figure 2: Results of Coherent-A2C With different settings for HalfCheetah-v2, where Figure 2a andFigure 2b show the learning curves and Figure 2c shows the average log variance of gradients duringsix stages in learning. The solid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped region representshalf a standard deviation of the average return over 10 random seeds.
Figure 3: Graphical model of Deep Coherent Exploration.
Figure 4: Learning curves for deep RL algorithms with different exploration strategies, where the topand bottom row corresponds to results of A2C and PPO respectively. The solid curves correspondto the mean, and the shaped region represents half a standard deviation of the average return over 10random seeds.
Figure 5: Learning curves for Coherent-A2C on OpenAI MuJoCo continuous control tasks. Thesolid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped region represents half a standard deviation ofthe average return over 10 random seeds.
Figure 6: Log variance of gradient estimates for Coherent-A2C and OurNoisyNet-A2C on OpenAIMuJoCo continuous control tasks. The solid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped regionrepresents half a standard deviation of the average log variance over 10 random seeds.
Figure 7: Learning curves for Coherent-A2C and OurNoisyNet-A2C on OpenAI MuJoCo continu-ous control tasks. The solid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped region represents half astandard deviation of the average return over 10 random seeds.
Figure 8: Learning curves for OurNoisyNet-A2C on OpenAI MuJoCo continuous control tasks. Thesolid curves correspond to the mean, and the shaped region represents half a standard deviation ofthe average return over 10 random seeds.
