Figure 1: Example unseen input digits and outputs from our method. Top row is the input, middlerow is the predictions and bottom row is the observed output.
Figure 2: Example unseen input image and output from our method (HyperRIM). Click on (b) tosee output of model while it trains, demonstrating stable training.
Figure 3: Details of the architecture backbone.
Figure 4: (a) Inner workings of Residual-in-Residual Dense Blocks (RRDBs), which comprises ofdense blocks (details in (b)). β is the residual scaling parameter. (b) Inner workings of dense blocks.
Figure 5: Our HyperRIM model consists of multiple sub-networks, each of which upscales by afactor of 2 and concatenates a random code to its input.
Figure 6: Visualization of different samples generated by our method (HyperRIM) and the baselines.
Figure 7: Comparison of Frechet Inception Distance (FID) to the target of the samples generated byour method (HyperRIM) and the baselines. Lower values of FID are better. We compare favourablyon this perceptual metric (FID).
Figure 8: Visualization of compressed input, decompressed output images from Pix2Pix and ourmethod (HyperRIM) and the observed target image. As shown, the Pix2Pix output contains largepixel blocks whereas HyperRIM output successfully removes most artifacts.
Figure 9: Visualization of output images from each method while traversing the space of randomcodes using gradient descent to reach the observed output image. As shown, (a) fails to reach theobserved output, (b) comes close to the observed output but does not quite reach it, and (c) reachesthe observed output and only encounters images with plausible content and texture. This revealsboth the (i) precision and (ii) recall of each method, i.e.: the ability of each method to generate (i)only plausible images and (ii) all plausible images, which include the observed output. Since (a)cannot generate the observed output, its recall is low. Since (b) cannot reach the observed output, itsrecall is also unsatisfactory. Since (c) can reach the observed output and does so smoothly withoutgenerating an implausible image, the recall and precision of (c) are high.
