Figure 1: (a): Amount of frames per game used for results on Atari over time plotted on a logscale. To make the plot more readable, all work after DQN that used exactly 200 Million frames isexcluded. (b): Median human-normalized score on 57 Atari games over time plotted on a log scale.
Figure 2: (a): Amount of frames needed per game to reach the same median human-normalizedscore as DQN over 57 games in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013).
Figure 3: (a): Frames needed to reach 2000 score on the Half-Cheetah task from OpenAI gym overtime. Grey dots indicate results and blue dots indicate the SOTA in sample efficiency at the time ofa result. The black line is the best fitting exponential model for the SOTA (blue dots). It correspondsto a doubling time in sample efficiency of 9 months. The vertical line indicates the switch fromresults on gym-v1 to v2 and ambiguous versions of gym. (b): Frames needed to reach 400 score inon the Walker Walk task from the DeepMind Control Suite over time. Grey dots indicate results andblue dots indicate the SOTA at the time of a result. The black line corresponds to a doubling time insample efficiency of 5 months. Note the different scaling of the y-axes in (a) and (b).
Figure 4: Frames needed to reach the same median human-normalized score as various baselinesover time. Graphs are normalized such that graphs with the same slope indicate the same doublingtime, despite different measurement horizons. The black line is the best fitting exponential modelfor the SOTA (all SOTA).
Figure 5: Frames needed to reach the specified score for various MuJoCo tasks from OpenAI gymover time. The vertical line indicates the switch from gym-v1 results to gym-v2 results and resultsfrom ambiguous versions of gym. Graphs are normalized such that graphs with the same slopeindicate the same doubling time, despite different measurement horizons. The black line is the bestfitting exponential model for the SOTA (all SOTA).
Figure 6: Frames needed to reach the specified score on various DeepMind Control Suite tasks overtime. Graphs are normalized such that graphs with the same slope indicate the same doubling time,despite different measurement horizons. The black line is the best fitting exponential model for theSOTA (all SOTA).
