Figure 1: Examples of the influences of the data on the learned representations. (a) Translationperpendicular to the coordinate axis. (b) Translation along the polar axis. (c) Translation of rotatedimages along the coordinate axis. (d) The learned presentation of three shapes on dSprites. Each linedenotes the projections of the rotation angles into the latent variables w.r.t. three shapes.
Figure 2: An example of action sequences. There are three images with differing sizes on the dataset(left box), and the AE learns a representation with one dimension of latent space (the double-arrowlines). So the total number of possible sequences is six. Two of them are meaningful, and the others aresomewhat random.
Figure 3: Comparison between the entropy of actions and KL divergence of latent variables.
Figure 4: (a) The architecture of FVAE. Though the samples distribute in the dataset randomly, theyhave intrinsic significance. Under a high pressure (β), the significant actions can pass informationalone the red line to itself along, and the information of insignificant actions is blocked. (b) The decoderreceives the label information except for the target action.
Figure 5: Re-entanglement phonomenon.
Figure 6: β vs. KL divergence on dSprites (left) and 3D Chairs (right). Each line denotes thedimensional KL diverge over β increasing.
Figure 7: Comparison between (a) β-VAE and (b) FVAE. We visualize the average projections of thefactors into the most informative latent variable on dSprites (only active units are shown). The coloredlines indicate three types of shapes (red: eclipse, green: square, blue: heart). (c) The disentanglementscores of β-VAE and FVAE (MIG, Chen et al. (2018)).
Figure 8: FVAE disentangles action sequences step-by-step. Latent traversals at each stage. Theleft is the results on dSprites. The right is the results on 3D Chairs.
Figure 9: Real samples from the training dataset.
Figure 10: Latent traversal of the trained models on A1, A2, and A3.
Figure 11: KL vs. β .
Figure 12: Latent traversal plots for FVAE on dSprites. The top row show the real samples fromdSprites.
Figure 13: Latent traversal plots for FVAE on 3D Chairs. The top row show the real samples from 3DChairs.
