Figure 1: The concept of meta modelingdictions, the original features, and the parameters of the base to produce a sequence of errorpredictions, Z ∈ RDXM. The parameters φ are obtained by solving an optimization problem,argminφ E[lb(^, y)], using a smooth loss function lb, e.g., the Frobenius norm lb = ∣∣^ - y∣∣F.
Figure 3: Bandwidth, excess, and deficitcosts.
Figure 2: Encoder-Decoder architecture integrat-ing a base and a meta modelGenerating Symmetric and Asymmetric Bounds The choice of loss function, lz , gives rise totwo scenarios. If lz is an even function, e.g., lz(y, y) = ∣∣y - yk1, the meta-model targets Z capturebase error equally in both directions: above and below the target. Hence, the uncertainty Z predictedat test time will represent a interval symmetric around y. If, on the other hand, lz takes the signin Z into account, it is possible to dedicate separate network nodes γl , γu ∈ γ to capturing lowerand upper band estimates, Zl and Zu, respectively, thus accomplishing asymmetric prediction. Letδ = y — y. For the asymmetric scenario the meta objective is modified as follows:Y* = arg min E[lm(Zl, max{δ, 0}) + Im(Zu, max{—δ,0})]	(2)γ3.2	BaselinesImplicit Heteroskedastic Variance Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017); Kendall & Gal (2017); Ohet al. (2020) applied a Gaussian model N(μ, σ2) to the output of a neural network predictor, where μ3Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021represents the prediction and σ2 its uncertainty due to observational (aleatoric) noise. The modelis trained to minimize the negative log-likelihood (NLL), with the variance being an implicit un-certainty parameter (in that it is trained indirectly) which is allowed to vary across the featurespace (heteroskedasticity). We apply the Gaussian in the sequential setting by planting it onto the
Figure 4: Sample of traffic volume predictions with uncertainty generated by the JMS and JMVmodels, along with a constant bound (around JMV) (miss rate set to 0.1 on TEST).
Figure 5: SPE9PR samples of oil (left) and water (right) production rates (”drift” scenario, miss rateset to 0.1 on TEST).
Figure 6: Samples of asymmetric bounds produced by the JMA. MITV sample (left) and SPE9PR(right) correspond to segments shown in Figure 4 and 5.
Figure 7: Sample from SPE9PR (simulation 0, drift condition), all components and systems shown.
Figure 9:	Sample from MITV (drift condition), all systems shown.
Figure 10:	Sample from MITV (non-drift condition), all systems shown.
