Figure 1: Reducing class selectivity improves average-case robust-ness. Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of corruption type (x-axis),class selectivity regularization scale (α; color), and corruption severity(ordering along y-axis). Test accuracy is reduced proportionally to corrup-tion severity, leading to an ordering along the y-axis; corruption severity 1(least severe) is at the top, corruption severity 5 (most severe) at the bottom.
Figure 2: Class selectivity imparts worst-case perturbation robustness. (a) Test accuracy (y-axis) as afunction of perturbation intensity (; x-axis) and class selectivity regularization scale (α; color) for the FGSMattack. (b) Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of attack optimization steps (x-axis) and α for the PGD attack.
Figure 3: Class selectivity causes highervariation in perturbability within andacross units (a) Coefficient of variation ofinput-unit gradient for each unit (CVu ; seeApproach 3; y-axis) as a function of layer(x-axis). (b) CV of input-unit gradient acrossunits in a layer (CVl ; y-axis) as a functionof layer (x-axis). Results shown are forResNet18 trained on Tiny ImageNet. Shadedregions = 95% confidence intervals of themean. See Appendix A.8 for results forResNet20 trained on CIFAR10.
Figure 4: Dimensionality in early layers predicts worst-case vulnerability. (a) Fraction of dimensionality(y-axis; see Appendix A.1.4) as a function of layer (x-axis). (b) Dimensionality of difference between clean andaverage-case perturbation activations (y-axis) as a function of layer (x-axis). (c) Dimensionality of differencebetween clean and worst-case perturbation activations (y-axis) as a function of layer (x-axis). Results shown arefor ResNet18 trained on Tiny ImageNet. See Appendix A21 for ResNet20.
Figure A1: Example naturalistic corruptions from the Tiny ImageNetC dataset. (a) Clean (no corruption).
Figure A2: Effects of class selectivity regularization on test accuracy. Replicated as in Leavitt and Morcos(2020). (a) Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of mean class selectivity (x-axis) for ResNet18 trained on TinyImageNet. α denotes the sign and intensity of class selectivity regularization. Negative α lowers selectivity,positive α increases selectivity, and the magnitude of α changes the strength of the effect. Each data pointrepresents the mean class selectivity across all units in a single trained model. (b) Same as (a), but for ResNet20trained on CIFAR10.
Figure A3: Controlling for clean test accuracy, and effect of corruption severity across corruptions. (a)Corrupted test accuracy normalized by clean test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of class selectivity regularizationscale (α; x-axis). Negative α lowers selectivity, positive α increases selectivity, and the magnitude of α changesthe strength of the effect. Normalized perturbed test accuracy appears higher in networks with high classselectivity (large α), but this is likely due to a floor effect: clean test accuracy is already much closer to the lowerbound—chance—in networks with very high class selectivity, which may reflect a different performance regime,making direct comparison difficult. (b) Mean test accuracy across all corruptions (y-axis) as a function of α(x-axis) for different corruption severities (ordering along y-axis; shade of connecting line). Error bars indicate95% confidence intervals of the mean.
Figure A4: Mean test accuracy across corruption intensities for each corruption type for ResNet18 testedon Tiny ImageNetC. Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of corruption type (x-axis) and class selectivityregularization scale (α, color). Reducing class selectivity improves robustness against all 15/15 corruption types.
Figure A5: Trade-off between clean and perturbed test accuracy in ResNet18 tested on Tiny ImageNetC.
Figure A6: Reducing class selectivity confers robustness to average-case perturbations in ResNet20 testedon CIFAR10C. (a) Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of corruption type (x-axis), class selectivity regularizationscale (α; color), and corruption severity (ordering along y-axis). Test accuracy is reduced proportionally tocorruption severity, leading to an ordering along the y-axis, with corruption severity 1 (least severe) at thetop and corruption severity 5 (most severe) at the bottom. Negative α lowers selectivity, positive α increasesselectivity, and the magnitude of α changes the strength of the effect (see Figure A2b and Approach 3). (b)Mean test accuracy across all corruptions and severities (y-axis) as a function of α (x-axis). (c) Corruptedtest accuracy normalized by clean test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of class selectivity regularization scale(α; x-axis). Negative α lowers selectivity, positive α increases selectivity, and the magnitude of α changesthe strength of the effect. Normalized perturbed test accuracy appears higher in networks with higher classselectivity (larger α), but this is likely due to a floor effect: clean test accuracy is already much closer to thelower bound—chance—in networks with very high class selectivity, which may reflect a different performanceregime, making direct comparison difficult. (d) Mean test accuracy across all corruptions (y-axis) as a functionof α (x-axis) for different corruption severities (ordering along y-axis; shade of connecting line). Error barsindicate 95% confidence intervals of the mean.
Figure A7: Mean test accuracy across corruption intensities for each corruption type for ResNet20 testedon CIFAR10C. Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of corruption type (x-axis) and class selectivity regularizationscale (α, color). Reducing class selectivity improves robustness against 14/19 corruption types. Error bars =95% confidence intervals of the mean.
Figure A8: Trade-off between clean and corrupted test accuracy in ResNet20 tested on CIFAR10C. Cleantest accuracy (x-axis) vs. corrupted test accuracy (y-axis) for different corruption severities (border color) andregularization scales (α, fill color). Mean is computed across all corruption types.
Figure A9: Reducing class selectivity confers robustness to average-case perturbations in ResNet50 testedon Tiny ImageNetC. (a) Test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of corruption type (x-axis), class selectivityregularization scale (α; color), and corruption severity (ordering along y-axis). Test accuracy is reducedproportionally to corruption severity, leading to an ordering along the y-axis, with corruption severity 1 (leastsevere) at the top and corruption severity 5 (most severe) at the bottom. Negative α lowers selectivity, positive αincreases selectivity, and the magnitude of α changes the strength of the effect (see Approach 3). (b) Mean testaccuracy across all corruptions and severities (y-axis) as a function of α (x-axis). (c) Corrupted test accuracynormalized by clean test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of class selectivity regularization scale (α; x-axis).
