Figure 1: ST-DNN computation and joint segmentation. The input to the network is the imageand an initial segmentation mask. ST-DNN dense descriptors are computed for each region of themask using equation 3. The segmentation updates by taking a few steps in the gradient direction ofequation 8. The process is iterated with the updated segmentation until the regions converge.
Figure 2: Comparison of covariance to rotation and translation of ST-DNN, and sota CNN descriptor.
Figure 3: Comparison of robustness to deformations of ST-DNN with sota CNN descriptors. Sampleresults on segmentation of original and deformed images (left), and quantitative results (right): highervalues indicates more robustness.
Figure 4: ST-DNN is smaller in size and uses fewer training images compared with SOTA DNNs.
Figure 6: Example loss gradient with respect to weights calculation for the ST-DNN using the"forward propagation" method. The example red path in arrows represents the calculation of thegradient of the loss with respect to the weights of the second layer. This procedure avoids having toaccumulate large matrix multiplies (to solve PDEs) as in back-propagation.
Figure 7: Schematic of the ST-DNN: We have a four layer ST-DNN with an additional pre-processing layer. The pre-processing layer, L0 in the schematic, extracts 3 color channels a grayscale channel and 4 oriented gradients at 5 scales α = {5, 10, 15, 20, 25} . The subsequent layersof the network have a smoothing layer α = {5}, a fully connected layer, and a non-linearity. Thenumber of hidden units for each layer are 100, 40, 20, 5 respectively.
Figure 8: Comparison of ST-DNN with SOTA deep networks for deformation robustness. ST-DNN is more robust as measured on all metrics.
Figure 9: Sample representative results on Real-World Texture Dataset with varying deforma-tions. We compare the ST-DNNs (ours), and deep learning based methods.
Figure 10: Sample representative results on Real-World Texture Dataset. Comparison withstate-of-the-art deep learning methods.
Figure 11: Sample representative results on Real-World Texture Dataset. Comparison withstate-of-the-art deep learning methods.
Figure 12: Sample representative results on Real-World Texture Dataset. Comparison withstate-of-the-art deep learning methods.
Figure 13: Sample representative results on Real-World Texture Dataset. We compare the ST-DNNs (ours) and STLD.
Figure 14: Sample representative results on Synthetic Texture Dataset. We compare the ST-DNNs (ours) and STLD.
