Figure 1: After adaptation to thesupport examples (blue), inference ismade from the query examples (red),which guides the following meta-update. While Task 1 compriseswell-distributed Dspt and Dqry, Task 2holds a significant support-query dis-crepancy. We limit the feedback flowfrom Task 2.
Figure 2: Average similarity scoreswith 95% confidence interval. Stan-dard indicates general few-shottasks. Poorly-defined indicatesextremely large support-query dis-crepancy; images from mismatchedclasses, and Well-defined imitatesτ*. More details in Appendix B.4.
Figure 3: Left: TCMAML was trained on 5-shot CUB-200 train set, and thereafter evaluated ondifferent test sets. Each dot represents a test task. 1000 tasks were evaluated for each dataset andeach task consisted of 75 query examples, 15 per class to be classified. y-axis is task accuracy, theaccuracy of 75 queries. Right: The test accuracy (solid line) and the number of tasks (dashed line)that were evaluated while excluding the outlier tasks. The test set was CUB-200.
Figure 4: The amount of resource used while training on mini-ImageNet 5-way 5-shot with a Conv-4backbone. Tested on a single GeForce RTX 2080Ti GPU. Left: GPU memory usage (GB) duringthe training (meta-train) phase and the evaluation (meta-test) phase. Right: Time consumption (sec)per 100 meta-update iterations in the meta-train phase.
Figure 5: An example of a 4-task batch and their TCMAML weights.
Figure 6: Reliability diagrams from MAML (left column), ABML (middle), and TCMAML (right)classification results. All experiments are 1-shot, and from the top row datasets are mini-ImageNet,CUB-200, and mini-ImageNet → CUB-200. Red bars indicate the empirical accuracy of the sampleswhose prediction confidence falls into the specific interval. Perfectly calibrated model should haveits bars aligned to y = x line (dashed). Deviation from the line is highlighted as blue if averageconfidence is higher than accuracy; overconfident, and dark if accuracy is higher; diffident. Notethat the confidence is always above 0.2 because there are 5 classes. Best seen in color.
