Figure 1: Illustrations of different models. (a) is the vanilla backbone model, which takes a sequenceof breathing signal as input, and predicts the corresponding sequence of oxygen saturation. (b) isthe multi-task model that has extra input v, and predicts extra output u. (c) is the multi-headedmodel that generates multiple predictions under different status, and the final output is obtained bycombining these predictions with the estimated status.
Figure 2: Gradient cosine similarities of different variables.
Figure 3: Visualization of the oxygen saturation predicted by the MUlti-TaSk model and the Multi-Headed model on a male subject in SHHS dataset. The background color indicates sleep stages. The‘dark grey', ‘light grey, and ‘white, corresponds to ‘Sleep, (N1, N2, N3), ‘REM' and 'Awake’.
Figure 4: Distributions of the ground-truth SpO2 readings ((a), (c), (e)), and the predicted SpO2 ((b),(d), (f)) by Multi-Headed model for the two races.
Figure 5: The predicted per-night averaged oxygen saturation for a COVID-19 patient from Apr 28to July 31, 2020. The patient turned negative for COVID-19 on May 5, 2020 (marked by the star).
Figure 6: Network architecture for the vanilla model.
Figure 7: Visualization of breathing signals and the corresponding oxygen level. (a) is an exampleof normal breathing signals. (b-d) are examples of different abnormal breathing signals. In everyfigure, the first row shows the breathing signals while the second row shows the ground truth oxygenlevel (in blue) and the oxygen level predicted by our model (in orange).
Figure 8: Visualization of full breathing signals having more information about oxygen level thanbreathing rates. Here are four examples of subjects having very similar breathing rate but differentoxygen saturation. However, if we look at the full breathing signals, we can still differentiate them.
Figure 9: MESA Example 1.
Figure 10: MESA Example 2.
Figure 11: MrOS Example 1.
Figure 12: MrOS Example 2.
Figure 13: Comparison between our model and linear regression and random forest.
Figure 14: Visualization of the toy dataset. It is a 1D piecewise linear function. The color indicatesthe auxiliary variable for every data point.
Figure 15: The benefits of switcher-based auxiliary learning. The figure shows the results of differentmodels for the toy dataset. Only the multi-headed model which uses a switcher based method learnsthis non-smooth function effectively.
