Figure 1: Sufficient input subsets (SIS) for a sample of CIFAR-10 test images (top). EaCh SIS imageshown below is classified by the respective model with ≥ 99% confidence. The "Adv. Robust” (Pre-trained adversarially robust) model we use is from Madry et al. (2017) and robust to l∞ perturbations.
Figure 2: Heatmaps of pixel locations comprising pixel-subsets. Frequency indicates fraction ofsubsets containing each pixel. (a) 5% pixel-subsets across CIFAR-10 test set for each model. Meanconfidence indicates confidence on 5% pixel-subsets. (b) Sufficient input subsets (threshold 0.9)across ImageNet validation images from Inception v3.
Figure 3: Sufficient input subsets (threshold 0.9) for example ImageNet validation images. Thebottom row shows the corresponding images with all pixels outside of each SIS subset masked butare still classified by the Inception v3 model with ≥ 90% confidence.
Figure 4: Percentage increase in mean SIS sizeof correctly classified compared to misclassifiedCIFAR-10 test images. Positive values indicatelarger mean SIS size for correctly classified im-ages. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervalfor the difference in means.
Figure 5: Mean SIS size on CIFAR-10 test imagesas SIS threshold varies. SIS size indicates fractionof pixels necessary for model to make the sameprediction at each confidence threshold. Modelaccuracies are shown in the legend. 95% confi-dence intervals are shaded around each mean.
Figure S1: Examples of SIS (threshold 0.99) on random sample of CIFAR-10 test images (15 Perclass, different random sample for each architecture). All images shown here are predicted to belongto the listed class with ≥ 99% confidence.
Figure S2: Examples of SIS (threshold 0.99) from the ResNet18 homogeneous ensemble (Section 3.1)and its member models. Each row shows original CIFAR-10 image (left), followed by SIS from theensemble (second column) and the SIS from each of its 5 member networks (remaining columns).
Figure S3:	Percentage increase in mean SIS size of correctly classified images compared to misclassi-fied images from a random sample of CIFAR-10-C test set. Positive values indicate larger mean SISsize for correctly classified images. Error bars indicate 95% confidence interval for the difference inmeans.
Figure S4:	Mean confidence of correctly vs. incorrectly classified images for each corresponding SISthreshold we evaluate in Figure 4 across the (a) CIFAR-10 test set and (b) our random sample of theCIFAR-10-C test set. Shaded region indicates 95% confidence interval.
Figure S5:	Accuracy on individual corruptions of CIFAR-10-C out-of-distribution images for originalmodels and models trained with input dropout (Section 4.5). Accuracy is given as mean ± standarddeviation over five replicate models.
Figure S6:	Pixel-subsets of CIFAR-10 test images shown to participants in our human classificationbenchmark (Section 3.4).
Figure S7:	Human classification accuracy on a sample of CIFAR-10 test image pixel-subsets (seeSection 3.4).
Figure S8:	Example SIS (threshold 0.9) from ImageNet validation images (top row of each block).
Figure S9:	SIS subsets and ordering of pixels removed by Batched Gradient FindSIS in a sample ofImageNet validation images that are confidently (≥ 90%) and correctly classified by the Inception v3model. The top row shows original images, second row shows the location of SIS pixels (red), andthird row shows images with all non-SIS pixels masked (and are still classified correctly with ≥ 90%confidence). The heatmaps in the bottom row depict the ordering of batches of pixels removed duringbackward selection (blue = earliest, yellow = latest).
