Figure 1: Random samples (rows 1-2) from a model trained with MoCA on CelebA-HQ, and thatmodel’s interpolations (rows 3-4) between images in latent space. The leftmost and rightmost columnsof rows 3-4 are the original images from the test set of CelebA-HQ which we are interpolating.
Figure 2: Left: CIFAR-10. Right: CelebA. Rows 1-2 show original image (odd column) and itsreconstruction (even column). Rows 3-4 show model’s interpolation between two test images inlatent space. The leftmost and rightmost columns of rows 3-4 are the original images from thecorresponding test set. Rows 5-6 show random samples drawn from a trained model.
Figure 3: The interplay between the latent dimension d of the MoCA network and the regularizationcoefficient λ. Larger d requires significantly larger λ to achieve comparable FID scores for thegenerated sample quality. See text for more details.
Figure 4: Impact of τ on optimal choice of λ andbest FID for generated samples. Optimal λ islower for lower τ . Best FID is better for lowerτ . This suggests that entropy is maximized moreaccurately when τ is smaller.
Figure 5: SVD of latent representation ∈ R128for models trained with various values of λ.
Figure 6: Random samples generated by a model trained (as described in Appendix A on CelebA-HQ256 × 256 for 850 epochs. Model checkpoint picked based on best visual quality.
Figure 7: Image reconstructions by a model trained (as described in Appendix A) on CelebA-HQ256 × 256. For each pair of columns, the left is the original image, and the right is the reconstruction.
Figure 9: Randomly generated samples from theMoCA model trained on CIFAR-10 with FID54.36 in table 1.
Figure 10: Randomly generated samples fromthe MoCA model trained on CelebA with FID44.59 in table 1.
Figure 11: Reconstructed test samples from theMoCA model trained on CIFAR-10 with FID54.36 in table 1.
Figure 12: Reconstructed test samples from theMoCA model trained on CelebA with FID 44.59in table 1.
Figure 13: Interpolation between two test im-ages in latent space for MoCA model trainedon CIFAR-10 with FID 54.36 in table 1. Theleftmost and rightmost columns are the originalimages from the corresponding test set.
Figure 14: Interpolation between two test im-ages in latent space for MoCA model trained onCelebA with FID 44.59 in table 1. The leftmostand rightmost columns are the original imagesfrom the corresponding test set.
Figure 15: Impact of regularization weight λ on FID score based on input size. Optimal valuesλ? (labeled with a red star) scale linearly with input size. Note that absolute FID scores are notcomparable between different image sizes! This figure focuses on relative trends.
