Figure 1: Games used in the experiments from Atari Arcade Environment. Games from left to rightin order: Roadrunner, Riverraid, Bankkeist, Seaquest, Amidar, Beamrider, Pong and UpandDown.
Figure 2: Attack impacts VS temperature constant for different games '2-norm bound with e = 10-8.
Figure 3: Attack impact vs logarithm base 10 of '2-norm bound. Left: Amidar. Middle: Pong. Right:UpNDown.
Figure 4: Up: Average empirical probabilities of ranked actions for three different formulations. Left:Bankheist. Middle: Pong. Right: UpNDown. Down: Expected probability of ranked actions of threedifferent formulations. Left: Riverraid. Middle: Amidar. Right: BeamRider.
Figure 5: Left: Impact change with varying e for '∞-norm bounded and '2-norm bounded perturbationin Myopic formulation for Roadrunner game. Right: Impact change with varying e for '∞-normbounded and '2 -norm bounded perturbation in Myopic formulation for Bankheist game.
Figure 6: Attack impacts vs number of iteration of random search (n) for Pong.
Figure 7: Example game from Atari Arcade Environment. The trained agent jumps in front of the careven though the agent is not in the same lane with the car in RoadRunner game.
Figure 8: Example game from Atari Arcade Environment. The trained agent forgets to recharge itsoxygen even though its condition to recharge is not critical in Seaquest game.
Figure 9: Example game from Atari Arcade Environment. The trained agent just waits withoutmoving until the enemy reaches the agent in Amidar game.
Figure 10: State-action values vs time graph for Atari Arcade Game Seaquest. Left: Unattackedagent. Middle: Pattanaik et al. (2018) adversarial formulation. Right: Myopic attack.
Figure 11: State-action values vs time graph for Atari Arcade Game Riverraid. Left: Unattackedagent. Middle: Pattanaik et al. (2018) adversarial formulation. Right: Myopic attack.
Figure 12: State-action values vs time graph for Atari Arcade Game Bankheist. Left: Unattackedagent. Middle: Pattanaik et al. (2018) adversarial formulation. Right: Myopic attack.
Figure 13: Sensitivity Analysis of RoadRunner. Left: γ = 10-8. Right: γ = 10-1017Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021A.7 Perturbation HeatmapsIn thise section we demonstrate the heatmaps of the raw pixel perturbations and the preprocessedframes from which the perturbations are computed.
Figure 14: Perturbation heatmaps of myopic formulation. Left: RoadRunner. Right: Riverraid.
Figure 15: Preprocessed frames. Left: RoadRunner. Right: Riverraid.
