Figure 1: Left: Comparison of CCA-PG and PG in contextual bandits with feedback, for various levels ofreward noise σr . Results are averaged over 6 independent runs. Right: Performance of CCA-PG on thebandit task, for different values of λIM. Not properly enforcing the independence constraint results in strongdegradation of performance.
Figure 2: Key-To-Door environments visual. The agent is represented by the beige pixel, key by brown,apples by green, and the final door by blue. The agent has a partial field of view, highlighted in white.
Figure 3: Probability of opening the door and total reward obtained on the High-Variance-Key-To-Door task(left two) and the Low-Variance-Key-To-Door task (right two).
Figure 4: Multi Task Interleaving Description. Top left. Delayed feedback contextual bandit problem.
Figure 5: Probability of solving ‘easy’ and ‘hard’ tasks and total reward obtained for the Multi Task Inter-leaving. Top plot: Median over 10 seeds after doing a mean over the performances in ‘easy’ or ‘hard’ tasks.
Figure 6: Overall architecture for the RNN network. For simplicity we assume without loss of generality thatBt and Φt include Xt .
Figure 7: Multiagent versions of the bandit problems. CCA-PG agents outperform PG in the single timestepversion.
Figure 8:	Baseline loss for policy gradientversus conditioned baseline loss for CCA inHigh Variance Key To Door.
Figure 9:	Impact of varianceover credit assignment perfor-mances. Probability of open-ing the door and total reward ob-tained as a function of the vari-ance level induced by the applereward discrepancy.
Figure 10: Visualization of attention weights on the High-Variance-Key-To-Door task. Left: a 2-dimensionalheatmap showing how the hindsight function at each step attends to each step in the future. Red lines indicatethe timesteps at which apples are picked up (marked as ‘a’); green indicates the door (marked as ‘d’); yellowindicates the key (marked as ‘k’). Right: A bar plot of attention over future timesteps, computed at the stepwhere the agent is just about to pick up the key.
Figure 11: Probability of solving each task in the 6-task setup for Multi Task Interleaving.
Figure 12: Impact of the number ofback-propagation through time steps per-formed into the hindsight function forCCA RNN. Probability of solving the hardtasks in the 6-task setup of Multi Task In-terleaving.
Figure 13: Impact of the unroll length over the probability of solving hard and easy tasks for CCA RNN.
Figure 14: The medical treatment example as a structured causal model.
