Figure 1: (a) The classic learning-based odometry framework, where 6-DOF poses are directlypredicted from deterministic latent representations. (b) The proposed information bottleneck (IB)framework for odometry learning. h and S are the deterministic and stochastic components, respec-tively. Superscripts o and P represent the observation- and pose-level transition models. Red solidarrows denote the pose regressor and red dashed arrows denote the bottleneck constraints. Outputarrows from a shaded stochastic representation represent samples from the learned latent distribution.
Figure 2: Visualization of intrinsic uncertaintyvs. rotation and translation. Top: KITTI. Bot-tom: EuRoC. ↑: rotation for turning left orright. t translation towards the forward direc-tion. pos: the evaluated position.
Figure 3: Visualization of intrinsic uncer-tainty for degraded data on KITTL ↑: rota-tion for turning left or right. J: translationtowards the forward direction.
Figure 4: Full uncertainty results of InfoVIO for (a) KITTI and (b) EuRoC. The top and bottom rowsrepresent translation and rotation results. The first, second, and third columns represent x, y, andz, respectively. x, y, Z are with respect to the coordinate system in KITTL pos-i means the result isevaluated at the i-th position in a clip.
Figure 5: Uncertainty results of InfOVIO on both noisy and missing data for (a) KITTI and (b)EuRoC. The top and bottom rows represent translation and rotation results. The first, second, andthird columns represent x, y, and z, respectively. x, y, Z are with respect to the coordinate system inKITTL Blue, orange, and green circles denote results from normal data, noisy data, and missi2ngdata, respectively. Both images and IMU records were degraded.
Figure 6: Uncertainty results of InfoVIO on noisy data for (a) KITTI and (b) EuRoC. The top andbottom rows represent translation and rotation results. The first, second, and third columns representx, y, and z, respectively. x, y, z are with respect to the coordinate system in KITTI. Blue, orange,green, and red circles denote results from normal data and degraded data with images, IMU, and bothimages and IMU being noisy, respectively.
Figure 7: Uncertainty results of InfOVIO on missing data for (a) KITTI and (b) EuRoC. The top andbottom rows represent translation and rotation results. The first, second, and third columns representx, y, and z, respectively. x, y, Z are with respect to the coordinate system in KITTI. Blue, orange,green, and red circles denote results from normal data and degraded data with images, IMU, and bothimages and IMU missing, respectively.
