Figure 1: Correlations between adversarial robustness and uncertainty estimates on the clean test seton SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. Top: Accuracy and confidence of the predictedclass. Bottom: ECE and variance (lower is better)in each adversarial robustness subset. Higheradversarial robustness level means the input are more adversarially robust (harder to attack).
Figure 2: Comparison between LS and our AR-AdaLS on the clean test set of CIFAR-10. (a) and(b): Accuracy and confidence score of the predicted class in each adversarial robustness subset. (c):ECE of Vanilla, LS and AR-AdaLS.
Figure 3: ECE on clean test and shifted data on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. For each shift intensity, weshow report a box plot summarizing the 25th, 50th, 75th quartiles across 19 shift types on CIFAR10-Cand 15 shift types on ImageNet-C. The error bars indicate the min and max value across differentshift types. Similar figures for Accuracy are shown in Figure 8 in Appendix and we observe that allthe single-model based methods have comparable accuracy while ensembles achieve higher accuracy.
Figure 4: ECE on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-10-C of AR-AdaLSwith varying number of adversarial robustness subset R.
Figure 5: Histogram of predictive entropy on out-of-distribution data. Each model is trained onCIFAR-10 and tested on CIFAR-100.
Figure 6: Comparison of ensembled models: ECE on both clean test data and shifted data on CIFAR-10. For each intensity of shift, we report a box plot summarizing the 25th, 50th, 75th quartiles across19 types of shift in CIFAR10-C. The error bars indicate the min and max value across shift types.
Figure 7: Reliability diagram of accuracy versus confidence of single model and ensemble model onthe clean test of CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. The perfect calibrated model should be aligned with thediagonal dotted line (above is under-confident, below is over-confident).
Figure 8: Comparison of ensembled models: ECE and Accuracy on both clean test data and shifteddata on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. For each intensity of shift, we show the results with a box plotsummarizing the 25th, 50th, 75th quartiles across 19 types of shift on CIFAR-10-C and 15 types ofshift on ImageNet-C. The error bars indicate the min and max value across different shift types.
Figure 9: Reliability diagram of accuracy versus confidence of single model and ensemble model onthe clean test of CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. The perfect calibrated model should be aligned with thediagonal dotted line (above is under-confident, below is over-confident).
Figure 10: Comparing accuracy and confidence of thecorresponding ensemble model for each method.
Figure 11: Variance on clean test and shifted data on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. For each shiftintensity, we show the results with a box plot summarizing the 25th, 50th, 75th quartiles across 19shift types on CIFAR10-C and 15 shift types on ImageNet-C. The error bars indicate the min andmax value across different shift types.
