Figure 1: PHYRE tasks require placing an object (the red ball) in the scene, such that when thesimulation is rolled out, the blue and green objects touch for at least three seconds. In (a), the ball istoo small and does not knock the green ball off the platform. In (b), the ball is larger and solves thetask. In (c), the ball is placed slightly farther left, which results in the task not being solved. Smallvariations in the selected action (or the scene) can have a large effect on the efficacy of the action.
Figure 2: We study models that take as input a set of initial state via an object-based or a pixel-basedrepresentation (blue box). We input the representation into a range of forward-prediction models,which generally comprise an encoder (yellow box), a dynamics model (green box), and a decoder(gray box). We feed that output to a task-solution model (red box) that predicts whether the goal stateis reached. At inference time, we search over actions that alter the initial state by adding additionalobjects to the state. For each action (and corresponding initial state) we predict a task-solutionprobability; we then select the action most likely to solve the task.
Figure 3: AUCCESS of object-based ( ) andpixel-based (N) task-solution model (y-axis) ap-plied on state obtained by rolling out an oracleforward-prediction model for τ0 seconds (x-axis).
Figure 4: AUCCESS of task-solution model ap-plied on state obtained by rolling out five object-based ( ) and pixel-based (N) forward-predictionmodels (y-axis) for τ0 seconds (x-axis). Forward-prediction models were initialized with τ = 3ground-truth states. AUCCESS of agent withoutforward prediction (No-fwd) is shown for refer-ence. Results are presented for the within-template(left) and cross-template (right) settings.
Figure 5: Left: Within-template forward-prediction accuracy (FPA) after τ0 seconds roll outof five forward-prediction models, and an “iden-tity” baseline that repeats the last input frame(dashed gray line). Right: Maximum AUCCESSvalue across roll-out as a function of forward-prediction accuracy averaged over τ0 = 10 sec-onds for the five models. Shaded regions and errorbars indicate standard deviation over 10 folds.
Figure 6: Left: Per-template AUCCESS of Dec [Joint] 1f with τ0 = 0 (no forward prediction)and τ0 = 10 (forward prediction) of five task templates that benefit the least from forward prediction(left) and five templates that benefit the most (right). Right: Per-template AUCCESS of the τ0 = 0model as a function of the number of objects in the task template (left) and improvement in per-template AUCCESS, called ∆ AUCCESS, obtained by the τ0 = 10 model (right).
Figure 7: Rollouts for three slightly different actions on the same task by: (1) the simulator and (2) aSTN trained only on tasks from the corresponding task template. Although the STN produces realisticrollouts, its predictions do not perfectly match the simulator. The small variations in action changewhether the action solves the task. The STN model is unable to capture those variations effectively.
Figure 8: Left: Forward-prediction accuracy (FPA; y-axis) after τ0 seconds (x-axis) rolling out fiveforward-prediction models. Right: Maximum AUCCESS value across roll-out (y-axis) as a functionof forward-prediction accuracy averaged over τ0 = 10 seconds (x-axis) for five forward-predictionmodels. Shaded regions and error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 folds. Both shown forcross-template setting.
Figure 9:	Comparison of Conv3D-{Latent,Pixel} classifiers on learned pixel-basedforward-prediction models: Dec and STN, in thewithin-template setting. Conv3D-Latent per-forms as well or better than Conv3D-Pixel,and hence we use it for the experiments in thepaper.
Figure 10:	Comparison of Tx-Cls andConv3D-Pixel classifiers on learned object-based forward-prediction models: IN andTx, in the within-template setting. SinceConv3D-Pixel generally performed better,we use it for the experiments shown in the paper.
Figure 11:	Effect of setting forward predic-tion loss to 0 in Dec [Joint]. The perfor-mance is stagnant with the rollout if loss onthe future prediction is set to 0, as expected.
Figure 12:	Performance of Dec [Joint]1f at different number of actions. The per-formance varies nearly linearly with numberof actions ranked.
Figure 13: Easiest and hardest templates in terms of FPA.
