Figure 1: Comparison of information acquisition performance among selective sensing (SS), com-pressive sensing (CS), and uniform subsampling (US) measured in PSNR and SSIM.The averagePSNR and SSIM improvements of SS over CS and US across all eight measurement rates are anno-tated on the figure.
Figure 2: Visual reconstruction quality comparison among selective sensing, compressive sensingand uniform subsampling. The reconstruction network used is ReconNet, and the example image isfrom the Set14. Across all the dimensionality reduction ratios, selective sensing produces a sharperimage with finer details presented, e.g. the beard and the skin textures.
Figure 3:	Visual reconstruction quality comparison among selective sensing, compressive sensingand uniform subsampling. The reconstruction network used is ReconNet, and the example image isfrom the Set5 dataset. Across all the compression ratios, selective sensing produces a sharper imagewith finer details presented, e.g. the eyelashes and the textures of the hat.
Figure 4:	Visual reconstruction quality comparison among selective sensing, compressive sensingand uniform subsampling. The reconstruction network used is ReconNet, and the example image isfrom the Set5 dataset. Across all the compression ratios, selective sensing produces a sharper imagewith finer details presented, e.g. the textures on the wings.
Figure 5:	Visual reconstruction quality comparison among selective sensing, compressive sensingand uniform subsampling. The reconstruction network used is ReconNet, and the example imageis from the Set14 dataset. Across all the compression ratios, selective sensing produces a sharperimage with finer details presented, e.g. the edges of the stripes.
Figure 6: Visual comparison between learned and random selection masks. Top to bottom: masksat the measurement rates from 0.03125 to 0.25. Left to right: learned selection masks of selectivesensing, selective sensing measurements, random selection masks, and randomly selected measure-ments. The masks and measurements are plotted based on color channels.
Figure 7: Visual comparison between learned and random selection masks. Top to bottom: masksat the measurement rates from 0.03125 to 0.25. Left to right: learned selection masks of selectivesensing, selective sensing measurements, random selection masks, and randomly selected measure-ments. The masks and measurements are plotted based on color channels.
Figure 8: Visual comparison between learned and random selection masks. Top to bottom: masksat the measurement rates from 0.03125 to 0.25. Left to right: learned selection masks of selectivesensing, selective sensing measurements, random selection masks, and randomly selected measure-ments. The masks and measurements are plotted based on color channels.
