Figure 1: Examples of compositional generalization with overlapping digits. Each sample is ahorizontal block with three images and two digits. The middle image X is input and the right twodigits Y = Y1 , Y2 are output. The left two images X1 , X2 are hidden components. X1 is in itsoriginal form, and X2 is flipped over left-top to right-bottom diagonal. The sum of the digits is evenin train, and odd in test. We hope to learn a prediction model in training, and transfer it to test.
Figure 2: Flowcharts of the proposed approach. X is input, Y is output, and H is hidden representa-tion. The architecture has three modules: g, h, f.
Figure 3: Examples of input for colored digitsexperiments. Output is the digit label and colorlabel. Upper is train, lower is test.
Figure 5: Transfer Error Rate (TER) during in-ference optimization. 100% is upper bound bydefinition. 50% means errors are balanced forin-distribution and out-of-distribution.
Figure 4: Out-of-distribution problem has differ-ent distributions in training and test. We hope tolearn a model in training distribution (blue), anduse it in test distribution (orange).
Figure 6: Visualization of hidden representations. Each representation is reduced to one dimensionvia t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008). We plot them jointly, training in blue, and test in orange. Theproposed approach (b) is close to expected chess board like result, similar to Figure 4.
Figure 7: Visualization for the proposed approach. The first row is ground truth. The second row isrecovered images from auxiliary network. The first column is the overlapping image. The second andthird columns are the images for the first and the second components, respectively. The results showthat the proposed approach is able to learn and transfer the ability to extract correct components.
Figure 8: Evaluation accuracy for different memory sizes in the proposed method.
Figure 9: Test samples and corresponding component images for crowd sourcing. Each sample is ahorizontal block with three images. The left two images are hidden components. The right image isthe overlapping of them. Only the overlapping image is shown to participants.
