Figure 1: Labelled instances from two classes and unlabelled instances (gray) alongside the Versionspace of (a) MCD where each MC sample is viewed as a distinct hypothesis (decision boundary),(b) MCP where there is one hypothesis but several perturbations of the unlabelled instance, and (c)BALC where there are several hypotheses in addition to the unlabelled instance and its perturbedcounterpart.
Figure 2: (Scenario 1) network output variations (for three classes, A, B, and C) caused primarilyby input perturbations. The red rectangle illustrates a potential limitation of MCD. Given that theseparameter perturbations do not result in network output variations and MCD is dependent uponsaid perturbations, unlabelled instances can be erroneously deemed uninformative. (Scenario 2)network output variations caused by both input and parameter perturbations. We show that whileBALCKLD is likely to acquire instances due to input perturbations, BALCJSD considers both inputand parameter perturbations when performing acquisitions.
Figure 3: An instance, x, is provided as input to the feature extractor, fω . The representation, v, ispassed through gφ to generate task predictions, and through hθ to help determine whether a label isrequested from an oracle. The zero-one loss of gφ acts as the ground-truth label for t where t ≈ 1indicates a hard-to-classify instance that would benefit from an oracle label. Otherwise, the instanceis pseudo-labelled by taking the argmax of the outputs of the prediction network.
Figure 4: Density of the outputs, t, of gθ colour-coded based on the zero-one classification errorduring the (a) early and (b) late stages of training. (c) the Hellinger distance, DH , between the twodistributions of t during training increases as they become more separable.
Figure 5: Validation AUC on (a) D2 at β = 0.3. Mean percent change in test AUC when comparingMCP with static and tracked acquisition functions to MCD with their static counterparts on (b) D1 and(c) D5. We show results for Var Ratio, Entropy, and BALD, at all fractions, β ∈ [0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9]and across five seeds.
Figure 6: Average test AUC for the oracle questioning strategies in the absence and presence, ofvarious magnitudes, of label noise on D1 using BALDMCP. We show that with up to 80% random ornearest neighbour label noise, SoQal still outperforms the remaining methods when trained withoutlabel noise. This illustrates that SoQal is better equipped to deal with oracle label noise.
