Figure 1: Illustration of Powers of layers for a category transfer task. The encoder and decoder aredirectly borrowed from a vanilla auto-encoder and are not learnable. At inference time, we applya variable number of compositions, producing different images depending on how many times wecompose the residual block in the embedding space. Depending on the task, we either modulate thetransformation and choose the result, or let a discriminator determine when to stop iterating.
Figure 2: Response of thediscriminators as a functionof the number of composi-tions for the transformationGaussian noise→natural im-age. We plot the average re-sponse and the standard de-viation over examples (gray).
Figure 3: Top: Comparison between Powers of layers (PoL) and CycleGAN (CLG) to denoiseimages of Urban-100 Huang et al. (2015). We provide standard deviation and additional results inAppendix C. Bottom: Visual comparison between our method (manual and discriminator choice) andCycleGAN for deblocking, denoising and debluring.
Figure 4: Left: Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for image-to-image translation tasks (lower isbetter). We compare CycleGAN and NiceGAN with POL/CycleGAN and POL/NiceGAN, where therespective translation functions are replaced with POL blocks. Right: example results.
Figure 5: Left: Different visual results with high resolution images. See the original imagesin Appendix D. Right: Comparisons of the generations obtained by models trained either withhigh-resolution or low-resolution images, applied to a high-resolution test image.
Figure 6: Evolution of the optimal number of composition according to the noise. The maximumnumber of compositions used for training is 30 and the Gaussian Noise standard deviation is 30.
Figure 7: Illustration of the different results obtained along the iterations of the recurrent block,during the transformation of a horse into a zebra. The first image is the original image, then eachimage corresponds to 5 additional compositions of our method. Since our method was learned with amaximum of 30 compositions the last two images are extrapolations.
