Figure 1: AURORA algorithm with a modular integration of RAED.
Figure 2: Environment simulations and observations. From left to right: (a) Object arrangementscenario initial simulation state without any distracting influences (DIs). (b) Air-hockey scenarioinitial simulation state without DIs. (c) Robot arm pushing an object in the environment. (d) Objectarrangement environment observation with DIs. (e) Air-hockey environment observation with DIs.
Figure 3: The variance in the environment ob-jects’ positions. Left (a): Object arrangementtask. Right: (b) Air-hockey task. The lines rep-resent the median scores while the shaded areasextend to the first and third quartile of the datadistribution obtained over 5 repetitions.
Figure 4: Positions of the two objects in the ar-rangement task after the execution of all con-trollers in two collections generated at 100% en-vironment stochasticity. AURORA achieves alarger exploration in the object configurationswhen using RAED.
Figure 5: Puck trajectoriesgenerated by controllers in thecollection at 100% environmentstochasticity. RAED achieves alarger spread in the trajectories.
Figure 6: From left to right: Proportion of controllers failing tomove (a) any object of interest in the object arrangement task,(b) both Object 1 and 2 in the object arrangement task, (c) thenon-random puck in the air-hockey task. The lines and shadedareas are obtained as described in Fig. 3.
Figure 7: Air-hockey scenario at 100% environ-ment stochasticity. Left: Prediction made byRAED. Right: Corresponding environment ob-servation showing a particularly misleading en-vironment observation. The distinction betweenthe “actual” puck and the random puck is madefor analysis purposes and not available to the net-work. Pixel activations range from 0 to 1 and arethresholded at a value of 0.5 for the illustration.
Figure 8: Air-hockey scenario at 100% environ-ment stochasticity. Left: Prediction made byRAED. Right: Corresponding environment ob-servation showing a collision between the twopucks. Pixel activations are thresholded as inFig. 7.
Figure 9: Air-hockey scenario at 100% environment stochasticity. Left: Prediction made by RAED.
Figure 10: Air-hockey scenario at 100% envi-ronment stochasticity. Left: Prediction made byAE. Right: Corresponding environment observa-tion showing two unconnected puck trajectories.
Figure 11: Air-hockey scenario at 100% envi-ronment stochasticity. Left: Prediction made byAE. Right: Corresponding environment observa-tion showing two unconnected puck trajectories.
