Figure 1: Results of original and balanced distribution. The original distribution is on the left and thebalanced one on the right. CNNs can only achieve 25.76% accuracy when trained on original datawhile our method can balance the distribution and achieve 86.28% accuracy.
Figure 2: Results of ablation study on NICO. All the experiments adopt NICO since NICO consistsof a wide range of domains and objects and all domains come from real-world images which makethe indication of results more reliable. The RFF dimension in (a) indicates the dimension of Fourierfeatures, where 10x indicates that the dimension of Fourier features are 10 times the size of originalfeatures and 0.3x indicates the sampling ratio is 30%. SRDB-N and SRDB-L indicate the originalSRDB and the degenerated version of SRDB that only eliminates the linear correlation betweenfeatures. Presaved size in (c) indicates the dimension of the presaved features and 0x indicates nofeatures are saved.
Figure 3: Saliency maps of the ResNet-18 model and the model trained with SRDB. The brighter thepixel is, the more contributions it makes to prediction.
Figure 4: NICOB.4	Details about the generation of MNIST-M in the setting of composional +dominant + flexible + adversarialThe MNIST-M are generated by blending digit figures from the original MNIST dataset over patchesextracted from images in BSDS500 dataset. The backgrounds are cropped from 200 images, resultingin 200 domains. The backgrounds from the same domain may be different given they are randomlycropped from the same image. We generate the adversarial setting by splitting the domains into 10subsets responding to the classes. We randomly choose 1 subset for 1 class in the training data andchoose 1 domain in the subset as the dominant domain. The ratio of the data from dominant domainto the data from other domains varies from 9.5:1 to 1:1. The subset chosen for one class for trainingis set to another class for testing, as well as the dominant domain.
Figure 5: Example Images for MNIST-MC Examples of saliency mapsExamples of saliency maps are shown in Figure 6.
