Figure 1: Distribution of graph features in the datasetmodularityτι and τ2 to Ti = 1 - (1∕√τi), i = 1,2 to bring their scope to the [0,1] interval. In this case,“realistic” settings with τ1 ∈ [1, 4] take up 50% of the variable range. Also, as avg degree feature islimited by the n of a particular graph, we decided to replace it with density (avg degree/(n-1)). Itisnot dependent on n and belongs to [0, 1]. Using all these considerations, we collected our dataset byuniformly sampling parameters for LFR generator from the set [n, Ti, T2, μ, density] and generatinggraphs with these parameters. Additionally, we filter out all disconnected graphs.
Figure 2: Measuring ARI clustering score for aparticular graph, measure, and measure parameterThus, the defined set of features [n, τ1, τ2, avg degree, modularity] is enough to consider all graphproperties mentioned above. Although modularity is a widely used measure, it suffers from reso-lution limit problems (Fortunato & Barthelemy, 2007). We acknowledge that this may cause somelimitations in our approach, which should be the topic of further research.
Figure 3: The results of LDA components.
Figure 4: The dataset projected on the two main components of LDA; the point color represents thewinning measure for each graph4.3 Gaussian filter in feature spaceUsing a filter in the feature space, we can suppress the noise and find actual zones of leadership forthe measures. We use the Gaussian filter with a scale parameter σ. For every given point of thespace, it takes the data points that are closer than 3σ and averages ARIs of the chosen points witha weight e-dist /2σ . This allows to give larger weights to closer points. If there are less than threedata points inside the sphere with a 3σ radius, the filter returns nothing, allowing to ignore the pointswith insufficient data.
Figure 5: The feature space [τ1, avg degree, modularity] divided into the leadership zones of sixmeasures. The yellow points represent the positions of real-world datasets under study in the space.
