Figure 1: A classifier space depicting how Alpha Net adaptivelyadjusts weak classifiers through nearest neighbor compositions.
Figure 2:	An illustration of Alpha Net. “Conv Net” is a stand-in for any fixed pre-trained modelwith a classification layer. For figure simplicity, the bias is omitted; Vki and αik are denoted as Vkand αi .
Figure 3:	Class improvements in average top 1 accuracy for classes in “few” test set of ImageNet-LT.
Figure 4: Improvements in average Alpha cRT (best few) top1 accuracy for each class in the test set, grouped as “few”,“medium”, or “many” classes. A KDE estimator was fit foreach group shown.
Figure 5: Alpha cRT top 1 accuracies on Imagenet-LT with varying max clip, γ. Dotted lines showbaseline cRT accuracies.
Figure 6: Evaluation of weight sharing for Alpha Net with varying γ. Alpha cRT accuracies in bothfigures come from the ImageNet-LT “few” test set. “Not shared” denotes Alpha Net trained withseparate alpha blocks’ weights as used in the main paper. “Shared” denotes Alpha Net with weightsshared across all alpha blocks. See the text for discussion.
Figure 7: Effects of top K. Alpha cRT accuracies in both figures come from the ImageNet-LT testset, grouped as “few”, “medium”, or “many” classes.
Figure 8: Evaluation of class splits from which we sample top K classifiers over all gammas. AlphacRT accuracies in both figures come from the ImageNet-LT “few” test set. The top K classifiers aresampled from “many”, “base”, or “all” classes.
Figure 9: Top 5 accuracy with varying max clip γ . Alpha cRT accuracies come from the ImageNet-LT test set, grouped as “few”, “medium”, “many”, or “all” classes.
Figure 10: Effects of max clip γ. Alpha LWS accuracies in both figures come from the ImageNet-LTtest set, grouped as “few”, “medium”, “many”, or “all” classes.
Figure 11: Effects of max clip γ. Alpha cRT accuracies in both figures come from the Places-LTtest set, grouped as “few”, “medium”, “many”, or “all” classes.
Figure 12: Effects of max clip γ . Alpha LWS accuracies in both figures come from the Places-LTtest set, grouped as “few”, “medium”, “many”, or “all” classes.
