Figure 1: Few-shot detectors are subject to the proposal neglect effect. On the left: an image (from the PASCALVOC split 3 novel classes test set) showing the top 10 proposals from a state-of-the-art few-shot detector TFA(Wang et al., 2020). On the right: the top 10 proposals from our cooperating RPN’s. Cat is in the novel classes{boat, cat, mbike, sheep, sofa} (i.e., both models are cat detectors). Note that the classifier in TFA will notsee a cat box, and so it cannot detect the cat. This is a disaster when this image is used in training. For ourapproach, the cat box is found and is high in the top 10 proposals.
Figure 2: Illustration of two-phase training in Faster R-CNN. During phase 1, all blocks are trained. Duringphase 2, only the top-layer classifier and bounding box regressor are fine-tuned.
Figure 3: Left is the original structure for the RPN in Faster R-CNN; right is our CoRPNs, consisting ofcooperating box classifiers.
Figure 4: Effect of the number of RPN's on novel AP50, under PASCAL VOC novel split 3, shot 1. The leftshows results using same hyperparameters (φ, λd, and λc). There is considerable variance across the numberof RPN,s. The middle shows the results of selected hyperparameters (with selection criteria discussed earlierin this section) for different numbers of RPN,s. CoRPNs with any number of RPN,s outperform TFA (numberof RPN =1), and the variance is much smaller than on the left. The right shows naive ensemble results. Naiveensemble improves the performance but not as good as CoRPNs with selected hyperparameters (middle).
Figure 5: Top 10 proposals and final detection results of TFA (Wang et al., 2020) (proposal row 1; detectionrow 3) and CoRPNs (proposal row 2; detection row 4). All images here are cat (cat is a novel category) testimages. Due to the proposal neglect effect, state-of-the-art TFA misses all cat boxes. By contrast, CoRPNscatch many more cat objects by eliminating the effect, thus significantly outperforming TFA. However, we alsonotice that CoRPNs still have difficulty of correctly classifying the proposals as cats, suggesting that improvingthe classifier will further boost the detection performance, which we leave as future work.
Figure 6: Detection results of TFA (Wang et al., 2020) (row 1 & 3) and CoRPNs (row 2 & 4) under PASCALVOC split 1 shot 1 (row 1 & 2), and split 3 shot 1 (row 3 & 4). Novel classes shown here are {bird, bus, cow,boat, cat, motorbike, sheep, sofa}. TFA fails to detect many novel objects due to the proposal neglect effect,while our CoRPNs catch many more novel objects by eliminating the effect.
Figure 7: Detection results of TFA (Wang et al., 2020) (row 1 & 3 & 5) and CoRPNs (row 2 & 4 & 6) underCOCO test sets (val2014). Novel classes shown here are {airplane, bird, boat, bottle, bus, cat, cow, horse,motorcycle, person, train}. TFA fails to detect many novel objects due to the proposal neglect effect, while ourCoRPNs catch many more novel objects by eliminating the effect.
