Figure 1: Neural Bayes-DMS network predictionon synthetic high dimensional data (lying on a 2Dplane) projected back to 2 dimensions for visual-ization. The different colors denote the label pre-dicted by thenetworkLθ(.) thresholded at 0.5. Thedarker shades of colors denote predictions made attraining data points while the lighter shades denotepredictions on the rest of the space.
Figure 2: The effect of Neural Bayes-MIM hyper-parameters on the final test performance forCIFAR-10. A CNN encoder is trained using Neural Bayes-MIM with different Configurations-hyper-parameters α, β and scaling of states on which the objective is applied. A one hidden layerclassifier (with 200 units) is then trained using labels on these frozen features to get the final testaccuracy. The plots show that performance is significantly worse when α = β = 0 and no scalingis used, showing their important role as a regularizer. The best performing model reaches 83.59%.
Figure 3: MNIST filters learned using Neural Bayes-MIM-v1 objective (Eq 8) using the configurationα = 4, β = 4. Majority of filters are dead. For comparison with filters from Neural Bayes-MIM-v2,see figure 4 (bottom).
Figure 4: MNIST filters learned using Neural Bayes-MIM objective Eq 10. Majority of filters aredead when regularization coefficient α = 0. Filters memorize input samples when regularizationcoefficient β = 0. Using both regularization terms results in filters that mainly capture parts of inputswhich are good for distributed representation.
Figure 5: Mean (solid line) and standard deviation (error band) of accuracy evolution during MLPclassifier training on CIFAR-10 using Neural Bayes-MIM encoder (blue) and random encoder (green).
Figure 6: Performance of Neural Bayes-MIM-v1 vs Neural Bayes-MIM-v2. A CNN encoder istrained using Neural Bayes-MIM with different configurations- hyper-parameters α, β and scaling ofstates on which the objective is applied. A one hidden layer classifier (with 200 units) is then trainedusing labels on these frozen features to get the final test accuracy.Green and blue dotted lines are theaverage of all the green and blue points respectively. Neural Bayes-MIM-v2 has better average andbest performance compared with Neural Bayes-MIM-v1.
