Figure 1: State model of the stochastic process XtWe assume the individuals evolve in a pattern in the space RD as shown in Figure 1. One examplesatisfying SuCh process is the stochastic differential equation(SDE), which is also known as the ltðprocess (0ksendal, 2003): dXt = g(Xt, t)dt + σdWt. Here dXt represents an infinitesimal changeof {Xt} along with time increment dt, g(∙, t) = (g 1(∙, t),…,gD(∙, t))T is the drift term (drifting vectorfield) that drives the dynamics of the SDE, σ is the diffusion constant, {Wt} is the standard BrownianMotion. Then the probability density of {Xt} is governed by the Fokker Planck Equation(FPE)(Risken & Caugheyz, 1991), as stated below in Lemma 1.
Figure 2: Comparison of generated data(blue) and ground truth(red) of Synthetic-1((a) to (c)),Synthetic-2((d) to (f)) and Synthetic-3((g) to (i)). In each case, it finally converges to a stationarydistribution.
Figure 3: (a) and (b): Wasserstein loss as iteration increases of Mt1. (c) to (f): The performancecomparision among different models on D2 and D7 of Mt1 and Mt2. (g) and (h): True (red) andpredicted (blue) correlations between Mt1(x-axis) and Mt2(y-axis) on D2 (left) and D7 (right).
Figure 4: (a) to (d): Group A: with full trajectory of training data, predictions of traded volume innext 100 days, RM(yellow) fails to capture the regularities of traded volume in time series, kalmanfilter based model(green) fails to capture noise information and make reasonable predictions, ourmodel(blue) is able to seize the movements of traded volume and yield better predictions. (e) to (h):Group B: predictions of our model without full trajectory.
Figure 5: Results of learning curl field:(a): the whole distribution is indicated by green, from whichwe choose subsets for training purpose, training samples at t0 , t1 , t2 and t3 are indicated by pink,orange, red and brown respectively. (b) and (c):the prediction at t1 and t3 are indicated by blue points.
Figure 6: Results of learning diffusion coefficient.
