Figure 1: The main motivation: (a) Real data distribution contains numerous modes. (b) Generator islikely to focus on the major modes, while ignoring the minor modes, when mode collapse problem isappeared. Consequently, samples are produced from a few modes. (c) MSGAN and DSGAN Maoet al. (2019); Yang et al. (2019) simply maximize the distinction of the generating samples, whendifferent noise vectors are injected, to alleviate the mode collapse problem. However, they fail tomaintain relative variation, which may lead to mode override or mode fusion (e.g., nearby modesM14 and M16 are merged) issues. (d) Our DivAugGAN exert extra constraint on the generator toensure the relative variation consistency in the translation process. This also guarantees that thechanging sale of the generated images in the image space is coherent to the difference of injectednoise vectors in the latent space. DivAugGAN is highly effectivesolution to further resolve the modecollapse problem and enhance the diversity.
Figure 2: DivAugGAN functions as a regularizer in the CGMs framework. DivAugGAN encouragesthe generator to explore the unseen distant image space. It also enforces the scale of the relativevariation for the generated images, which is consistent with the difference between the injected latentcodes. As a result, the discriminator not only pays attention to the generated images from the minormodes, but also gain the possibility to differentiate little variation between the nearby local maxima.
Figure 3: Qualitative comparisons of DivAugGAN with DRIT and MSGAN on dog → cat, andsummer → winter for two-domain multimodal image-to-image translation tasks. DivAugGANgenerates images with much more variation (diverse color, shape, light, and orientation) over DRITand MSGAN. Complete results in the supplementary.
Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons of DivAugGAN (M) with MDMM and MSGAN integratd MDMMon image weather condition dataset for multi-domain translation. Our model generate images withenhanced diversity and superior visual quality. Only sunny → foggy translation result is shown;complete results in the supplementary.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons of DivAugGAN (S) with StarGANv2 on AFHQ dataset formulti-domain multimodal translation. Our model can generate images with superior diversity. Onlywild → cat, and wild → dog translation results are shown; complete results in the supplementary.
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison results on alps seasonal transfer dataset for multi-domain translation.
