Figure 1:	Example of graphs and their associated invariants2.2 What do we use to recover the signal?As previously mentioned in Section 2.1, an invariant should be able to detect a signal. But if our goalis to recover it, we should find mathematical objects that are able to provide a vector. To this effect,we introduce in this paper a new set of tools in the form of matrices. We denote by MG,e the matrixobtained by cutting an edge e of a graph G in two half edges (see Figure 2 for an example). Indeed,this cut amounts to not summing over the two indices i1 and i2 associated to these two half-edgesand using them to index the matrix instead. We will drop the index G , e of the matrix when thecontext is clear.
Figure 2:	Obtaining a matrix by cutting the edge of a trace invariant graph G2.3 Phase Transition within this FrameworkWe can represent the tensor from which we hope to extract the signal represented graphically as:Tij1 ...jk-1	=	β vivj1 . . . vjk-1	+	Zij1...jk-1• × ∙Figure 3:	Graphical decomposition of the tensor TThis decomposition leads us naturally to decompose in a similar way a tensor trace invariant IG (T)into two parts, separating a first contribution IG(N)(T) associated to the pure noise tensor contributionand a second part IG(S) (T) enclosing all the other contributions, which are resulting from the additionof the signal.
Figure 3:	Graphical decomposition of the tensor TThis decomposition leads us naturally to decompose in a similar way a tensor trace invariant IG (T)into two parts, separating a first contribution IG(N)(T) associated to the pure noise tensor contributionand a second part IG(S) (T) enclosing all the other contributions, which are resulting from the additionof the signal.
Figure 4:	Decomposition of a matrix graph and the melon example•	Detection but no recovery: If M(D)op	M(N) -E(M(N))op, M(R)op thendetection but no recovery. We can detect the presence of the signal (thanks to the high-est eigenvalue) but we can’t recover the signal vector since the leading eigenvector is notcorrelated to the signal vector.
Figure 5: Detection using the melonic graph.
