Figure 1: Graph structures that LUMP GNNs failto discriminate in terms of node classification tasks.
Figure 2: Illustration of memory augmentation applied to the two graphs in figure 1: Ga (left) andGb (right). Both graphs are augmented with one memory node. Aggregation paths of a1 and b1are presented as two hop subtree structures, corresponding to a two round message passing usingthe memory augmented attention mechanism. Memory connections are drawn as dashed lines andoriginal connections as solid lines. The figure implies that, although the local subtree structuresrooted at a1 and b1 are identical, the message carried by the memory node distinguishes a1 from b1,provided that the message passing is performed for more than one round.
Figure 3: Comparison of memory aug-mented GAT with GAT on synthesizeddata, performance measured in trainingaccuracy, results for initial 50 gradientiterations are discardedα(l)αijλψij exp βi(jl) /Zi(l) ,1Mλ exP (βj))∕Z(",exp βi(jl) /Yi(l),1(i=j)exp βi(jl) ∕Yi(l)ifi,j∈Vif i ∈ V, j ∈ VMif i ∈ VM , j ∈ Vifi,j∈VM(3)where hi(l) ∈ Rdl denotes the hidden feature of node i ∈ V in the l th layer with hi(0) = Xi ,and βi(jl) = φ(l) (σ(l) (hi(l)), σ(l) (h(jl))) with σ(l) a (possibly) nonlinear function for the l th layer.
Figure 4:	Consistent port numberings for Ga and Gb that makes them locally distinguishableGbFigure 5:	Consistent port numbering for Ga and Gb that fails to distinguish a1 , a4 and b1Garg et al. (2020) that since consistent port numbering functions are non-unique, there exists someport numbering functions that does not strengthen expressiveness, we illustrate this phenomenonusing the construction in figure 4 and figure 5. Figure 4 shows a port numbering that makes a1 , a4receiving different messages with that of b1. Meanwhile in figure 5 the port numbering can notdistinguish a1, a4 and b1. Finding a consistent port numbering that succeeds in distinguishing localstructures is yet another challenging task, MemGAT thus offers an easier choice when the two graphshave different global features.
Figure 5:	Consistent port numbering for Ga and Gb that fails to distinguish a1 , a4 and b1Garg et al. (2020) that since consistent port numbering functions are non-unique, there exists someport numbering functions that does not strengthen expressiveness, we illustrate this phenomenonusing the construction in figure 4 and figure 5. Figure 4 shows a port numbering that makes a1 , a4receiving different messages with that of b1. Meanwhile in figure 5 the port numbering can notdistinguish a1, a4 and b1. Finding a consistent port numbering that succeeds in distinguishing localstructures is yet another challenging task, MemGAT thus offers an easier choice when the two graphshave different global features.
Figure 6:	Two graphs Ga = (Va, Ea) and Gb = (Vb, Eb) that DimeNet cannot distinguish locally:for any V ∈ {Va, Vb} and all w, u, v ∈ V satisfying (u, w) ∈ E, (u, v) ∈ E, the graph is constructedsuch that ∠wuv = n/2 and for any (u, V) ∈ E, the distance between U and V is identical.
