Figure 1: Block diagram of MIL framework. The feature extractor module θfeature extracts a featurevector fxi ∈ F, ∀xi ∈ X . Then, the MIL pooling filter module θfilter aggregates the extractedfeature vectors and obtains a bag level representation hX ∈ H. Lastly, the bag level representationtransformation module θtransform transforms bag level representation into predicted bag label Y ∈ Y.
Figure 2: MIL pooling filters. The feature matrix FX obtained from the bag X = {x1, x2, x3, x4}contains 4 feature vectors fx1 , fx2 , fx3 and fx4. Each feature vector consists of4 features highlightedwith different colors. Moreover, attention weights of the instances are given in [wi]. Outputsof different MIL pooling filters are shown. Note that the difference between ‘distribution’ and’distribution with attention'(‘dist_w_att')pooling is more visible for the 3rd feature in purple.
Figure 3: Examples of three types of images in the dataset are shown together with their corresponfingground truth metastases masks: (a) fully normal - all cells are normal, (b) fully metastases - all cellsare metastases and (c) boundary - mixture of normal and metastases cells.
Figure 4: Percent metastases histograms for training, validation and test sets.
Figure 5: Confusion matrices for +ve/-ve bag classification.
Figure 6: Confusion matrices for ucc classification.
Figure 7: Confusion matrices for 3-class classification.
Figure 8: Confusion matrices for metastases task in 2-task classification.
Figure 9: Confusion matrices for metastases task in 2-task classification.
Figure 10: 3-class MIL classification task: classifying bags of metal balls from 3 different productionlines. (a) Distribution of radius of balls produced in red, green and blue production lines. (b) Lossand (c) accuracy values of MIL models with ‘distribution’ (dist.) pooling, ‘mean’ pooling and ‘max’pooling filters on the test set bags with 10, 50, 100 and 200 balls per bag.
Figure 11: Confusion matrices for models with ‘distribution’ (dist.) pooling, ‘mean’ pooling and‘max’ pooling filters on the test set bags with 10, 50, 100 and 200 balls per bag.
