Figure 1: A graphic illustration of model reconstruction for factor normalization. The rect-angles represent the feature maps in a DNN. The blue dashed rectangle represents the latent layersbetween the input and the last dense layer. The left panel shows an original DNN structure withthe original input feature. The right panel shows a modified DNN structure with factor and residualfeatures. As one can see, the factor and residual feature are treated separately. The latent factor isreinserted back into the model before the last dense layer for output.
Figure 2: LR stands for logistic regression and FN stands for factor normalization. The left panelshows the training loss on MNIST images of the logistic regression model and FN models optimizedby SGD. The right panel shows the prediction accuracy on the validation dataset. Different numbersof factors are tested (i.e.,d = 1, 2, 10) .
Figure 3: The top panel is the training loss in log scale for baseline model (blue dash line) and FNmodel (red solid line) with four different optimizers. The bottom panel is the validation accuracyfor baseline model (blue dash line) and FN model (red solid line) with different optimizers.
Figure 4: Results of AlexNet on the CIFAR10 dataset. A benchmark accuracy is set as the accuracythat is 1% lower than the optimal accuracy of baseline model. The left panel shows the time costfor each optimization algorithm to obtain the benchmark accuracy between baseline model and FNmodel. The right panel shows the training loss in log scale after 200 epochs for the four optimizationalgorithms between baseline model and FN model.
Figure 5: Results of ResNet50 on the CatDog dataset. A benchmark accuracy is set as the accuracythat is 1% lower than the optimal accuracy of baseline model. The left panel shows the time costfor each optimization algorithm to obtain the benchmark accuracy between baseline model and FNmodel. The right panel shows the training loss in log scale after 200 epochs for the four optimizationalgorithms between baseline model and FN model.
