Figure 1: DCN is susceptible to complex-valued scaling, whereas our method is robust. We choosea single example, and show a polar plot of the model confidence of correct class as we multiplythe image by a unit magnitude complex number; higher accuracy means larger radius. For DCN,there are three lobes of high accuracy regions, whereas our method has constant accuracy throughoutthe plot. This fluctuation in accuracy is due to CReLU breaking the complex-scale equivariance inDCN.
Figure 2: The complex plane and the half-cylinder manifold of complex numbers. F takes a complexnumber, a point in the complex plane, to a 3D point on the cylinder. F-1 turns the 3D point back toa complex number.
Figure 3: The convolution is equivariant to complex multiplication. a) Four colored points zi arerotated and scaled in the complex plane. b) The wFM of the 4 points with equal weights is locatedat the phase midpoint and the log magnitude midpoint. It is equivariant to rotation and scaling.
Figure 4: Here, we replicate the visualization of Tangent ReLU from Chakraborty et al. (2019).
Figure 5: Our division function is invariant to complex-valued scaling. Consider 4 numbers in thecomplex plane, the 4 colored points on a large magenta trapezoid. Their equally weighted wFM(black dot) sits inside the trapezoid at the geometric mean of their magnitudes and the mean of theirphases. When the 4 complex numbers are scaled by 2 exp(i 10O∏π), the points move to the smallertrapezoid. While the manifold distances from the black dot to the colored dots are identical andinvariant to scaling, the black dot divided by each of the 4 color dots results in 4 different numbers(the same colored dots with a black center around 0°) which are also invariant to complex-valuedscaling. We use this more expressive complex-valued division function instead of SurReal’s real-valued distance transform to build up hierarchical complex-valued features.
Figure 6: Different distance metrics as a function of the angle between two points. We see thatthe two metrics are indistinguishable for points with small angular differences, and at large angulardistances, Euclidean distance is under-estimates Arc distance. Thus, for small neighborhoods withsmall angular variation, euclidean distance metric acts as an approximation of arc distance metric.
