Figure 1: (Left) The learning curves for the scheduled value of e with the loss variation along thegradient descent direction (the vertical line indicates when the ramp-up ends), and (Right) the losslandscapes along the gradient descent direction at each training step in the later phase of ramp-upperiod (epoch 50-130). The thin lines and thick lines in the figure on the right show some samplelandscapes at each step and the median values, respectively. Our method shows tight bounds likeCROWN-IBP, while its landscape is as favorable as IBP, achieving the best performance amongthese four methods (see Table 1).
Figure 2: (Top) Cosine similarities between two consecutive loss gradients and (Bottom) the ratio ofthe number of unstable ReLUs during the ramp-up period. A large number of unstable ReLUs, highnonlinearity, leads to an unfavorable landscape that can negatively affect the optimization process.
Figure 3: The ratio of the number of unstable ReLUs for models with different a settings during theramp-up period. Notation p/q denotes the variant with sampling a ∈ {0,1} with P (a = 1 | |l| >|u|) = P and P (a = 1 | |l| ≤ |u|) = q for unstable ReLUs. As the number of a = 1 increases, ittends to have more unstable ReLUs, which leads to less smooth loss landscapes.
Figure 4: Violin plots of the test loss with the corresponding verified error (Left) and of tight-ness (Right) for various linear relaxations. Lower is better. This shows that the proposed relaxationmethod has a tighter bound than the others relaxation methods.
Figure 5: The ratio of number of a used for unstable ReLUs during the ramp-up period. Note thatthe blue region denotes the number of a = 0 when |l| ≤ |u|. It indicates that the proposed methodreduces the number of a satisfying a = 1 (PUrple+yellow).
Figure 6: Illustrations of linear relaxation methods. Except for (b), they illustrate the relaxationswhen l ≤ 0 ≤ u (Unstable ReLU). (b) Illustration of the relaxation of IBP when u, l > 0 (ActiveReLU).
Figure 7: The learning curves for the scheduled value of with the loss variation along gradientdescent direction (equivalent to Figure 1). As the ratio of the number of a with a = 1 increases, theloss variation increases.
Figure 8: A zoomed-in version of Figure 7 for epochs 100-200.
Figure 9:	The learning curves for the target perturbation etrain during the ramp-up period.
Figure 10:	(Top) Gradient difference and (Middle) cosine similarities between two consecutive lossgradients, and (Bottom) the ratio of the number of unstable ReLUs during the ramp-up period.
Figure 11:	Mode connectivity between CROWN-IBP and IBP, where w0 and w1 are well-trainedmodels using CROWN-IBP bound and IBP bound, respectively. θc is trained using CROWN-IBP(11a) and IBP (11b), respectively.
Figure 12: Mode connectivity between IBP and OURS, where w0 and w1 are well-trained modelsusing IBP bound and OURS bound, respectively. θc is trained using IBP (12a) and OURS (12b),respectively.
Figure 13: Mode connectivity between CROWN-IBP and OURS, where w0 and w1 are well-trainedmodels using CROWN-IBP bound and OURS bound, respectively. θc is trained using CROWN-IBP(13a) and OURS (13b), respectively.
Figure 14: The ratio of the number of active (top) and dead (bottom) ReLUs during the ramp-upperiod.
Figure 15: Number of active (Green), unstable (Orange), and dead (Red) ReLUs.
Figure 16: Histograms of the distribution of the slope u+U+- When l ≤ 0 ≤ u during the ramp-upperiod.
Figure 17:	Violin plots of the test loss (Left Column) and of tightness (Right Column) for variouslinear relaxations same as in SeCtion 6. Lower is better.
Figure 18:	(Top) Gradient difference and (Middle) cosine similarities between two consecutive lossgradients, and (Bottom) the ratio of the number of unstable ReLUs during the ramp-up period.
Figure 19: (Top) Gradient difference and (Middle) cosine similarities between two consecutive loss-gradients, and (Bottom) the ratio of the number of unstable ReLUs on CROWN-IBP (β = 1) withλ = 0, λ = 0.01, λ = 10 and OURS.
Figure 20: Robust loss of CROWN-IBP (β = 1) with λ = 0, λ = 0.01, λ = 10 and OURS duringtraining.
