Figure 1: Visualization of Flow-based, RT and Our Integrated Spatial adversarial examples onMNIST, CIFAR-10 and Caltech-256. More discussions can refer to Appendix A.1.
Figure 2: Loss landscape of Integrated Spatial Attack on CIFAR-10. (Left) A distant view of losslandscape w.r.t W before the optimization in Eq. 8. (Middle) A close view before the optimizationthat shows a highly convex surface near the initialization point. (Right) The loss landscape aroundthe maxima w* after the optimization in Eq. 8. More explanation can refer to Appendix A.34Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 20213	Relationships B etween Sensitivity and Spatial Robustness3.1	RelationshipsBased on the analysis above, next we focus on investigating the relationships between the strength ofone specific robustness and other types of robustness. Firstly, we empirically explore these relation-ships through conducting thorough experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and Caltech-256 datasets.
Figure 3: Relationship between sensitivity (PGD) robustness and two spatial robustness on threedatasets. The X-axis represents the PGD-trained models under different PGD iterations while the Y-axis represents the robust accuracy on test data perturbed by Flow Attack (red) and RT Attack (blue).
Figure 4: Saliency map of four types of train-ing models on some randomly selected images onCaltech-256.
Figure 5: Median of skewness of Sanency maps difference among robust models across all test datacompared with other models. The first three sub-pictures are compared with the naturally trainedmodel while the last one is compared with the PGD trained model.
Figure 6: The difference between themodel trained by the PGD method andMax AT with different parameter forthe PGD attack in the adversarial train-ing.
Figure 7: The Pareto front between the robustness score and sacrificed clean accuracy on MNIST,CIFAR-10 and Caltech-256. The vertical axis is the decrease of the natural accuracy compared withthe naturally trained model and has been under the log transformation along two directions.
