Figure 1: Matrix ShUffle-Exchange model consists of one or more Benes block that is enclosed byZ-Order flatten, and Z-Order unflatten transformations. For a 2k X 2k input array, Benes block hastotal of 2k - 1 Quaternary Switch and 2k - 2 Quaternary Shuffle layers, giving rise to O(n2 log n)time complexity.
Figure 2: Depiction how the Quaternary Shuffle layer permutes the matrix (technically it permutes1D sequence representation of matrix). The left image shows the matrix elements ordered accordingto Z-Order curve, where the ordering indices are represented by base-4 numbers. The right imageshows element order after the Quaternary Shuffle. Quaternary Shuffle permutation can be interpretedas splitting matrix rows into two halves (white and green) and interleaving the halves, then applyingthe same transformation to columns (white and red).
Figure 3: Training and evaluation speed on ma- Figure 4: Training and evaluation speed on graphtrix squaring task for a single input instance. transitivity task for a single input instance.
Figure 5: The effect of modelsize on the accuracy on the ma-trix squaring task.
Figure 6: Generalization impactof Z-Order flatten compared toraster scan flatten on matrix tran-sitivity task.
Figure 7: The effect of modelsize on the accuracy for the tri-angle finding task.
Figure 8: Sudoku puzzle with 17 given clues from the test set (Palm et al., 2018) and its solutionobtained by the Matrix Shuffle-Exchange network.
Figure 9: The receptive field for the single output feature on 4 × 4 input and one Benes block. Orangeconnections and green Switch Units depicts components that participate in the considered outputfeature; grey connections and Switch Units - ones that don,t.
Figure 10: Residual block used in ResNet-29. Figure 11: ResNet-29 full architecture for algo-rithmic tasks on matrices.
Figure 13: Error rate depending on training stepon a test set for matrix transpose and squaring.
Figure 12: Error rate depending on training stepon a test set for matrix rotation by 90 degreesand bitwise XOR operation.
