Figure 2: Accuracy versus number of parameters for this work (GMLP) and the MLP baseline: (a)CIFAR-10 dataset, (b) MIT-BIH dataset. The x-axis is in a logarithmic scale.
Figure 3: Ablation study on the impact oftemperature annealing and entropy loss terms.
Figure 4: Ablation study demonstrating theimpact of different pooling functions.
Figure 5: Ablation study on the impact ofusing different group sizes (m). For thisexperiment, We used k=1536.
Figure 6: Ablation study on the impact ofusing different number of groups (k). Forthis experiment, we used m=16.
Figure 7: MNIST visualization of pixels selected by the Group-Select layer: (a) using completeimages as input, (b) using images that the lower half is replaced by Gaussian noise. In this figure,warmer colors represent pixels being being present in more groups.
Figure 9: Visualization of theselected features within eachgroup. Every two consecutiverows show features selectedfor a certain group.
Figure 8: The Bayesian networkand conditionals used to generatethe synthesized dataset of binaryfeatures A-F and target J.
Figure 10: Visualization of prediction accuracies for the synthesized dataset using different groupsize (m) and number of groups (k).
Figure 11: Ablation study on the impact of Figure 12: Ablation study demonstrating thetemperature annealing and entropy loss terms. impact of different pooling functions.
Figure 13:	Ablation study on the impactof using different group sizes (m). For thisexperiment, we used k=352.
Figure 14:	Ablation study on the impact ofusing different number of groups (k). Forthis experiment, we used m=4.
Figure 15: The impact of using differenttree types. For this experiment, we usedk=352 and adjusted the number of layers.
Figure 16: The impact of using differenttree types. For this experiment, we usedL=6 and adjusted the number of groups.
Figure 17:	A toy example demonstrating the representation of feature groups as an undirectedweighted graph.
Figure 18:	Undirected graphs showing features as nodes and groups as the strength of connectionbetween the nodes for: (a) HAPT, (b) Tox21, and (c) Diabetes datasets.
Figure 19: Visualization of pixels selected by each group for the CIFAR-10 GMLP architecture. Red,green, and blue colors indicate which channel is selected for each location. Due to space limitations,25 random groups out of 1536 total groups visualized here.
Figure 20:	Visualization of pixels selected by the group-select layer for the CIFAR-10 GMLPmodel. Warmer colors represent features that are being selected more frequently.
Figure 21:	The GMLP network architecture.
Figure 22: Analysis of group correlations for the Tox21 dataset: (a) the correlation matrix for the first256 output features of the Group-Select layer, (b) the histogram of correlation values computedfor inter-group feature pairs, and (c) the histogram of correlation values computed for intra-groupfeature pairs.
Figure 23: Analysis of group correlations for the Diabetes dataset: (a) the correlation matrix forthe first 256 output features of the Group-Select layer, (b) the histogram of correlation valuescomputed for inter-group feature pairs, and (c) the histogram of correlation values computed forintra-group feature pairs..
Figure 24: Comparison of using the Softmax relaxation and concrete relaxation to implement theGroup-Select layer: (a) the Tox21 dataset and (b) the Diabetes dataset.
