Figure 1: Comparison of visualization results for four datasetsManifold Data Generation. Fig. 3 compares images generated from interpolated points betweentwo nearest neighbors on the embedding using three autoencoders in comparison. The imagesgenerated by the ELIS-AE have clear boundaries and look sharper than those produced by the othertwo autoencoders. Results for several other objects are shown in Fig. A6 in Appendix A.4.
Figure 2: 2D embeddings of Coil20: ELIS encoder vs UMAP, and four manifold groups in terms ofsymmetry.
Figure 3: Comparison in manifold data generation.
Figure A1: Illustration of Markov-Lipschitz deep learning (MLDL) framework using an ML-AutoEncoder (best viewed in color).
Figure A2: Comparison of visualization results of autoencoders on training and testing setsresults on the training set, so it did not work well on the test set either. ELIS-AE, as a autoencoder-based mehtod, have a huge advantage in terms of generalization performance, because it can handlethe test data. And it is very easy to apply to specific tasks such as classification, regression andclustering.
Figure A3: Comparison of visualization results for toy dataset on training setis very close in two-dimensional space), thus the resulting manifold consists of two nestedrings.
Figure A4: Comparison of visualization results for real-world dataset on training setFigure A5: Details of the ELIS-Enc’s embedding of the Coil20 and four manifold patterns17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021A.4 Manifold data generationThe manifold generation task generates a complete manifold structure from finite manifold samples.
Figure A5: Details of the ELIS-Enc’s embedding of the Coil20 and four manifold patterns17Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021A.4 Manifold data generationThe manifold generation task generates a complete manifold structure from finite manifold samples.
Figure A6: Comparison in visualization with LIS-AE and TopoAE in manifold generation. The leftside is three embedding result, and black point in manifolds is the location of the interpolation. Theright side is the interpolation results. there are 12 images in the right of the figure, the leftmost andthe rightmost images are the original images, and ten images in the middle are the generation resultswith geodesic distance.
Figure A7: Comparison in visualisation of four different cross-layer schemes.
Figure A8: Embedding results with varying ν in input space.
Figure A9: Embedding results with varying ν in latent space.
