Figure 1: Two insances of InfoMax options in the four state deterministic chain. Left: Options arediverse but all state transitions per option are one-step. Right: Options enable relatively long statetransitions but option-policies are the same at some states.
Figure 2: Single Task learning in Gridworld Four Rooms.
Figure 3: Learned option-policies (πo) and termination probabilities (βo) for each option in GridworldFour Rooms after 6 × 105 steps. Arrows show the probablities of each action and heatmaps showprobabilities of each βo . First row: A2IMOC. Terminating regions are clearly different each otherand there are a few overlapped regions. Second row: AOC. Almost all states has high terminationprobablity with option 0, 1, 3 and option 2 has no terminating region. Third row: Our AOC.
Figure 4: Single Task learning in MuJoCo Point Four Rooms.
Figure 5: Single Task learning in MuJoCo Point Four Rooms.
Figure 6: Lifelong learning in MuJoCo Point Billiard.
Figure 7: InfoMax options in the four state deterministic chain. Left: With three options. Right:With four options.
Figure 8: Neural Network architecture used for the Gridworld experiments (top) and the MuJoCotasks (bottom).
Figure 9: Learned option-policies (πo) and termination functions (βo) for each option in GridworldFour Rooms after 5 × 104 steps. Arrows show the probablities of each action and heatmaps showprobabilities of each βo . First row: A2IMOC. Option 0 tends to go down, option 1 and 2 tend to goright, and option 3 tends to go up. Second row: AOC. All options tend to go down. Third row: OurAOC. Option 0, 1, and 3 tend to go down and option 2 tends to do right.
Figure 10: Left: Learned option-policies (πo) and termination functions (βo) in MuJoCo PointFour Rooms experiment. Arrows show the expected moving direction of the agent and heatmapsshow probabilities of each βo . Right: Sampled trajectories of each method. First row: PPIMOC.
Figure 11:	Ablation studies. Top: Peformance progression of A2IMOC in Gridworld Four Rooms.
Figure 12:	Ablation studies. Top: Peformance progression of A2IMOC in Gridworld Four Rooms.
