Figure 1: Column 1 are the original figures. Column 2 are the figures with top20 target-object-ACE units ablated. Column 3 represents the ACE-distribution of target-object-related units, where chair(Type-l entangled) has flat ACE-distribution and is difficult to remove, while painting(Type-2 entangled)and light(disentangled) has concentrated ACE-distribution thus are easy to remove. Column 4 shows the change of ratio and rank of ACE for different objectsafter ablate top20 target-object-ACE units. The increase of ACE for some objects after ablating painting-ACE units is so large that they emerge after paintings areremoved. Column 5 presents how ablated figure is changed by adding the top-20 target-object-ACE units. Where red frames and blank mean disappearance whileyellow frames mean appearance. Column 6 presents how original figure is changed by ablating the top-20 ACE units back when pixel normalization coefficientis fixed to before-ablation level. Column 7, which is the difference between column 5 and column 6, presents the effect of pixel normalization: preservation andsubstitution.
Figure 2: The architecture of a layerin the PG-GAN.
Figure 3: (a) Disentangled case: ablating top-20 light-ACE units eliminates the light objects on ceil-ing. (b) Deactivating-ablation entanglement: ablating chair-ACE units cannot eliminate the chairs.
Figure 4: The mechanism of how pixel normalization causes entanglement. The first row representsthe mechanism of how ablated figure is changed by adding the top 20 related units back whenpixel normalization coefficient is fixed to the after-ablation level. The second row represents themechanism of how original figure is changed by ablating the top 20 related units back when pixelnormalization coefficient is fixed to the before-ablation level. The right large figure represents theeffect of pixel normalization.
Figure 5: ACE Distribution determines whetherand how entanglement occurs.
Figure 6: The changes in ACE rank-ing and ratio determine what typesobjective are used to in-paintedFirst, the distribution of δu→c determines whether an object class could be ablated. In Figure 5, weselect three typical types of object classes, including chair, painting and light, to illustrate how theACE distribution directly determines an object’s ability to be disentangled. We ablate the units withACE ranking from top to down, and observe an apparent gap between chair (categorized as Type-1)objects and painting & light (categorized as Type -2 disentangled). While the chairs’ area remainsstubborn with top-80 ACE units ablated, the painting and light objects take no more than 20 of thetop ACE units ablated to be eliminated.
