Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed method. The voxel grid prediction module predicts coarsevoxel grid representation which is further refined by a series of GCNs. The GCNs use contrastivedepth features from rendered depths of the current shape and the predicted depths from MVSNet.
Figure 2: Attention weights visualization. From left to right: input images from 3 viewpoints,corresponding ground truth point clouds color-coded by their view order and the predicted meshvertices color-coded by the attention weights of the views. Only the view with maximum attentionweight is visualized for each predicted points for clarity.
Figure 3: Qualitative evaluation on ShapeNet dataset. From top to bottom: one of the input images,ground truth mesh, multi-view extended Pixel2Mesh, Pixel2Mesh++, and ours. Our predictions arecloser to the actual shape, especially for the objects with more complex topologies.
Figure 4: Depth prediction network (MVSNet) architectureOur depth prediction module is based on MVSNet Yao et al. (2018) which constructs a regularized3D cost volumes to estimate the depth map of the reference view. Here, we extent MVSNet to predictthe depth maps of all views instead of only the reference view. This is achieved by transformingthe feature volumes to each view’s coordinate frame using homography warping and applyingidentical cost volume regularization and depth regression on each view. This allows the reuse ofpre-regularization feature volumes for efficient multi-view depth prediction invariant to the order ofinput images. Figure 4 shows the architecture of the our depth estimation module.
Figure 5: Qualitative evaluation: best vs pretty wireframe models. The best models while beingpreferred by the evaluation metrics lead to degenerate meshes, with irregularly sized faces andself-intersectionsFailure CasesSome failure cases of our model (with pretty setting) are shown in Figure 6. We notice that the roughtopology of the mesh is recovered while we failed to reconstruct the fine topology. We can regard therecovery from wrong initial topology as a promising future work.
Figure 6: Failure Cases. Our system can struggle to roughly reconstruct shapes with very complextopology while some fine topology of the mesh is missing.
