Figure 1: Evolution of the corresponding FID and KID scores during training for the datasets Stan-ford Cars, CelebA, CIFAR10, and MNIST.
Figure 2: Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for CelebA dataset. Simulation results correspondto Subclass A GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameter λ.
Figure 3:	Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for CelebA dataset. Simulation results correspondto Subclass B GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameter λ.
Figure 4:	Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for CelebA dataset. Simulation results correspondto Subclass C GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameter λ.
Figure 5: Discriminator outputs for real (D(X)) and sythetic (D(G(Z))) samples, KID, FID scoresfor CelebA dataset. Simulation results correspond to Hinge and Wasserstein GANs for differentvalues of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameter λ.
Figure 6:	Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for Stanford cars dataset. Simulation results corre-spond to Subclass A GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameterλ.
Figure 7:	Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for Stanford cars dataset. Simulation results cor-respond to Subclass B GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameterλ.
Figure 8:	Likelihood ratio (r), KID, FID scores for Stanford cars dataset. Simulation results cor-respond to Subclass C GANs for different values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameterλ.
Figure 9:	Discriminator outputs for real (D(X)) and sythetic (D(G(Z))) samples, KID, FID scoresfor Stanford cars dataset. Simulation results correspond to Hinge and Wasserstein GANs for differ-ent values of the maximum gradient penalty hyperparameter λ.
Figure 10:	Random samples for different GANs objective function (and maximum gradient penaltyregularization parameter λ = 10) on Stanford cars dataset.
Figure 11:	Random samples for different GANs objective function (and maximum gradient penaltyregularization parameter λ = 10) on CelebA dataset.
Figure 12:	Random samples for different GANs objective function (and maximum gradient penaltyregularization parameter λ = 10) on CIFAR-10 dataset.
