Figure 1: The figure illustrates the proposed pipeline of prediction. A generic object detector pro-cesses an image, and then the detected boxes are taken from the original image, updated by BBRe-finement, and taken as the output predictions.
Figure 2: The figure shows crops which can be refined even with the naive way because a cropincludes only one, nice visible object.
Figure 3: The figure shows crops that cannot be refined by the naive way because a crop includesmultiple objects, usually of the same class. Note, precise labeling of such images is a hard task evenfor humans.
Figure 4: Augmentations of a box. The green box represents the GT label. The original crop israndomly padded. The center’s position is slightly distorted (and visualized as a green dot) as wesuppose BBRefinement will be applied to a generic detector’s predictions, which can produce suchdistortion.
Figure 5: The figure illustrates two images taken from the COCO dataset, where the boxes areinpainted ground truth labels. It is evident that some labels are imprecise, and a lot of labels aremissing. Such behavior can be seen mainly in images that include groups, and it is a known issue ofthe COCO dataset.
Figure 6: The image illustrated crops with green ground truth and yellow refined inpainted labels.
Figure 7: The image illustrated crops with green ground truth and yellow refined inpainted labels.
Figure 8: Influence of distortionsof correct classes with random incorrect classes. The figure shows that BBRefinement is robust onincorrect class, but it is sensitive to center position distortion. Such strong robustness in the dis-tortion of class may, on the other hand, mean that information about the class is not important forBBRefinement, and therefore, BBRefinement can be trained even without it.
Figure 9: Influence of crops sizeper image, where the image can include multiple crops. The time on GPU is 23ms for B1 and 44msfor B3. We could predict all crops from a single image in one batch, which helped keep the timesmall. The time means that BBRefinement runs 18FPS for the B1 backbone and 13FPS for theB3 one. The speed can be further increased by parallelizing crops’ preparation and optimizing themodel's speed by automatic tools.
