Figure 1: The illustration of characteristicsof the backdoor trigger. The red box rep-resents the boundary of the minimum cov-ering box, and the red pixel indicates thetrigger location.
Figure 2: The heatmap of the attack success ratewhen the trigger is in different position at attackedimages. The right corner is the position of the trig-ger in the poisoned images used for training.
Figure 3: ASR and appearance of the triggerwith different non-zero color value in attackedimages. The red dot indicates the ASR of trig-ger with original color value (128 pixel).
Figure 4: The pipeline of the proposed transformation-based attack enhancement.
Figure 5: The saliency maps of images under standard and enhanced backdoor attacks.
Figure 7: The pictures of some printed CIFAR-10 images taken by a camera with different dis-tances. All pictures are classified as ‘Deer’ by theenhanced BadNets, whereas they will be classifiedas their benign label by the standard BadNets.
Figure 6: Layerwise correlation coefficients of critical data routing paths between (benign sample,attacked sample), (benign sample, transformed attacked sample), and (attacked sample, transformedattacked sample). The background color indicates the standard deviation over 100 samples.
Figure 8: The picture of some out-of-sampleimages with the backdoor trigger taken by acamera. All pictures are classified as the targetlabel ‘Deer’ by the enhanced BadNets, whereasthey will be classified as their benign label bythe standard BadNets.
Figure 9: Some poisoned samples generated by different backdoor attack methods. In this experi-ment, the target label is ’Deer’. Except for the Consistent Attack, the ground-truth label of generatedpoisoned samples and the target label is not consistent.
Figure 10: The example of some generated attacked samples with additive Gaussian noise.
Figure 11: Transformed attacked samples with different types of color-shifting. All images arerandomly transformed with maximum perturbation size ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4}.
Figure 12: Attack success rates of enhanced attacks with the maximal shrinking size of 4-pixels,under the ShrinkPad defense with different shrinking sizes.
Figure 13: Attack success rate of enhanced backdoor attacks w.r.t. different maximal shrinkingsizes under ShrinkPad-4 and Standard. First Row: ‘BadNets+’; Second Row: ‘Blended Attack+’;Last Row: ‘Consistent Attack+’.
Figure 14: The control gates are multiplied to the layer’s output channel-wise, resulting in the actualrouting nodes. The layerwise routing nodes are linked together to compose the routing paths (Wanget al., 2018).
