Figure 1: Comparison between Gaussian latent representations and discrete latent representationsin a multi-modal situation. Gaussian latents are structurally limited in such a setting. (a) The idealsituation when there is no posterior collapse as multiple modes appear, but the prior distributionis a poor approximation of the posterior. (b) Posterior collapse happens, and no multi-modal in-formation is conveyed from the learned prior. (c) Discrete latent representation can ameliorate theposterior collapse problem while the prior can approximate the posterior more accurately when bothare restricted to be discrete.
Figure 2: Quantitative comparison on the MNIST guessing task. The small dots represent the pre-dictions for 1000 testing samples. Our method in (a) successfully produces accurate uncertaintyestimate for each mode. Probabilistic U-Net uses conventional Gaussian latent parametrization,thus the sample’s density provides no useful information about the uncertainty level, as shown in theleft axis. We also count the frequencies for each category and plot it on the right axis. However, theapproximation is far less accurate than ours even calculated on the entire testing dataset.
Figure 3: Results visualization on theMNIST guess game. Note that our modelcan predict calibrated uncertainty estimation(e.g.“2” appears with probability 0.25 ver-sus our prediction 0.2634, best to zoom ona screen to see the probability annotation in(a)). While Probabilistic U-Net cannot pre-dict such estimates and can produce non-sensible output from random sampling.
Figure 4: Visualization of our results on the highly ambiguous samples from LIDC-IDRI dataset.
Figure 5: Results visualization on LIDC segmentation task. (a) The small dots represent test datainstances’ DG2ED values and the triangles mark the mean values. Our performance is competitive withthe state-of-the-art. (b) We show the segmentation results for some frequently used code, annotatedat the bottom. The segmentation from the codes of probability < 10-4 are left blank.
Figure 6: Results fromuncertainties are shown.
Figure 7: Results from Probabilistic U-Net on the MNIST guessing task. 6 random samples areshown.
Figure 8: Results from our model on the LIDC-IDRI segmentation task. Top-8 results with thepredicted uncertainties are shown.
Figure 9: Results from our model on the LIDC-IDRI segmentation task. Top-8 results with thepredicted uncertainties are shown.
Figure 10:	Results from Probabilistic U-Net on the LIDC-IDRI segmentation task. 8 random sam-ples are shown.
Figure 11:	Results from Probabilistic U-Net on the LIDC-IDRI segmentation task. 8 random sam-ples are shown.
