Figure 1: The typical plot of the DDFN measures for a random non-convolution layer in G(z; θg)trained on STFT and logarithmic DWT representations of UrbanSound8K dataset. (a) The base-line SA-GAN (Zhang et al., 2019), (b) the BigGAN architecture (Brock et al., 2019) with spectralnormalization in both G(z; θg) and D(x; θd), (c) the BigGAN configuration with spectral normal-ization only in D(x; θd), and (d) the scaled up (by a factor of 2) configuration for (c). Arrows inthese sub-figures refer to collapse onsets.
Figure 2: Generated logarithmic DWT spectrograms using our modified BigGAN model with spec-tral normalization and the DDFN measure. From left to right: decreasing e and α makes G(z; θg) togenerate spectrograms with higher qualities and lower varieties. In this typical example, k denotesthe total number of spectrogram variety in each batch.
Figure 3: Comparison of original and reconstructed sounds from the generated logarithmic DWTspectrograms with identical phase matrix randomly drawn from an original speech signal from MCV.
Figure 4: The proposed architecture, which is the slightly modified version of BigGAN (Brocket al., 2019). (Top): The generator architecture. (Middle): A residual block in generator. (Bottom):a residual block in discriminator.
Figure 5: Generated logarithmic DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and the DDFN fora random signal sig1. Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the original phase.
Figure 6: Generated logarithmic DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and the DDFN foranother random signal sig2 . Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the original phase.
Figure 7: Generated linear DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and the DDFN for arandom signal sig1. Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the original phase.
Figure 8: Generated linear DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and the DDFN for an-other random signal sig2 . Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the original phase.
Figure 9: Generated logarithmic-real DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and the DDFNfor a random signal sig1. Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the original phase.
Figure 10: Generated logarithmic-real DWT spectrograms with our modified BigGAN and theDDFN for another random signal sig2 . Synthesized signals are reconstructed with the the origi-nal phase.
