Figure 1: Explanatory dialogue starts whenthe user presenting a specific alternate plan(foil). We consider two foils, one that is in-valid and another that is costlier than theplan. System explains the invalid plan bypointing out an action precondition that wasnot met in the plan, while it explains the foilsuboptimality by informing the user aboutcost function. These model information areexpressed in terms of concepts specified bythe user which we operationalize by learn-ing classifiers for each concept.
Figure 2: A simplified probabilis-tic graphical models for explanationinference, Subfigure (A) and (B) as-sumes classifiers to be completely cor-rect, while (C) and (D) presents caseswith noisy classifier.
Figure 3: A simplified probabilistic graphical models for explanation inference, Subfigure (A) and (B) assumesclassifiers to be completely correct, while (C) and (D) presents cases where the classifier may be noisy.
Figure 4: Montezuma Foils: Left Image shows foils for level 1, (A) Move right instead of Jump Right (B) Goleft over the edge instead of using ladder (C) Go left instead of jumping over the skull. Right Image shows foilfor level 4, (D) Move Down instead of waiting.
Figure 5: Sokoban Foils: Left Image shows foils for Sokoban-switch, note that the green cell will turn pinkonce the agent passes it. Right Image shows foil for Sokoban-cell.
Figure 6: Saliency map based explanation shown to users as part of H3pointed to providing more information about the model (for example, information like what actionswould have been possible in the failed state).
Figure 7:	Results from Sokoban-switch on the distribution of non-precondition concepts for eachaction. For each action the table reports the concept with the maximum difference between the distri-bution of concept for that specific version, versus the overall distribution and the average differencein estimates across concepts.
Figure 8:	Results from Sokoban-switch and Sokoban-Cell on the distribution of action cost acrossdifferent concepts. Here we report only the cost for push actions, since only those actions result inhigher cost.
Figure 9: Screenshot from the survey done to collect sokoban concepts.
Figure 10:	Screenshot from the study interface for H1.
Figure 11:	Screenshot from the study interface for H2.
Figure 12:	Screenshot from the study interface for H2.
