Figure 2: Graphical representation of the re-sults derived in Theorem 3.10 on the optimal-ity tracking properties of H-SGD for a generalnon-convex 1-dimensional function. In par-ticular, as shown in the figure, under the con-sidered assumptions and for “small enough”variations of the homotpy parameter, H-SGDtracks in expectation an r-optimal solutionacross homotopy iterations.
Figure 1: Graphical representation of a 1-dimensional function with wi-ι,t ~ N (0, 1)that satisfies the “expected” PL condition (As-sumption 3.6) but not the classical PL condi-tion in the considered region.
Figure 3: Graphical representation of the ob-jective function in Problem equation 15 vsw.
Figure 4: Visualization of the estimated μparameter for the objective function in Prob-lem equation 15 vs w .
Figure 5: Expected optimality gap of H-SGD(blue) and SGD (black) averaged across 100runs vs epochs for the toy-case described inSection 4.1Figure 6: Expected loss of H-SGD (blue)and SGD (black) averaged across 100 runsvs epochs for the sine-wave regression casedescribed in Section 4.2Figure 7: Visualization of the homotopy ob-jective functions vs w for different values ofhomotopy parameter. The black stars repre-sent (wi, f (wi, λi)), i.e. the H-SGD iterateswith associated objective function value.
Figure 6: Expected loss of H-SGD (blue)and SGD (black) averaged across 100 runsvs epochs for the sine-wave regression casedescribed in Section 4.2Figure 7: Visualization of the homotopy ob-jective functions vs w for different values ofhomotopy parameter. The black stars repre-sent (wi, f (wi, λi)), i.e. the H-SGD iterateswith associated objective function value.
Figure 7: Visualization of the homotopy ob-jective functions vs w for different values ofhomotopy parameter. The black stars repre-sent (wi, f (wi, λi)), i.e. the H-SGD iterateswith associated objective function value.
Figure 8: Visualization of the target objec-tive functions vs w. The black stars represent(wk, f(wk)), i.e. the SGD iterates with asso-ciated objective function value.
Figure 9: Graphical representation of the 1-dimensional neural network deployed for the toy-caseexperiment described in Section 4.1.
Figure 10: Predicted values y∖ (blue) vs true values y∖ (black) for different values of λ generated byusing H-SGD.
Figure 11: Error averaged across 100 runs of H-SGD (blue) and SGD (black) vs epochs for theclassification task described in Section 4.3.
