Figure 1: Accuracy and NMI clustering performance on four different datasets with noisy labels.
Figure 2: PCA decomposition of test set examples in the embedded space and generative samplesusing CVaDE and VaDE for (a)-(b) Gender, (c)-(d) Ethnicity. In this configuration, CVaDE obtainsa NMI of 0.52 (gender) and 0.4 (ethnicity) while VaDE obtains a NMI close to 0 for both tasks.
Figure 3: Mean face and sampled faces for each learned cluster, top two rows corresponding togender, bottom rows to ethnicity5	ConclusionIn this work, we present a novel constrained deep clustering method, CVaDE, that incorporates clus-tering preferences in the form of pairwise constraints, with varying degrees of certainty. In contrastto existing constrained deep clustering approaches, CVaDE uncovers the underlying distribution ofthe data, resulting in the ability to generate new samples, perform Bayesian model validation andoutlier detection. With the integration of domain knowledge, we show that our model can drive theclustering algorithm towards the partitions of the data sought by the practitioners, achieving state-of-the-art constrained clustering performance in real-world and complex data sets. Additionally,our model proves to be robust to noisy constraints as it can efficiently include uncertainty into theclustering preferences. As a result, the proposed model can be applied to a variety of applicationswhere the difficulty of obtaining labelled data prevents the use of fully supervised algorithms.
Figure 4: Left: PCA decomposition of CVaDE learned embedded space with representative samplesfrom the dataset, right: baseline VaDE embedded spaceImpact of Constraints In order to try to understand how the number of constraints providedimpacts the performance of CVaDE, we performed an experiment using the heart echo dataset whereprogressively more and more constraints were provided to the model during training. Figure 5demonstrates that the clustering performance of CVaDE improves as more pairwise constraints areprovided. This trend continues until 5000 pairwise constraints are provided (requiring 0.35% of thedataset to be labeled), at which point the performance reaches a plateau.
Figure 5: Plot demonstrating that CVaDE’s performance improves as more constraints are given. At5000 pairwise constraints the performance equals that of N = 20000 (the total number of samples)Table 8: Hyperparameters setting of both our model, CVaDE, and the unsupervised VaDE.
