Figure 1: Neural Relational Inference forlearning the interaction graph. Picturetaken from (Kipf et al., 2018)taneously learns the dynamics from multi-agent trajectories and infers their relations. In particular,nri builds upon variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and introduces latentvariables to represent the hidden relations. Despite its flexibility, a major limiting factor of nri is thatit assumes the relations among the agents are static. That is, two agents are either interacting or notinteracting regardless of their states at different time steps, which is rather restrictive.
Figure 2: Probabilistic graphicalmodel representation of dynamicmulti-agent relational inference.
Figure 3: Visualization of the DYARI model. It infers pairwise relations at different time steps giventrajectories. The bottom diagram shows the details of the encoder and the decoder is the same as nri.
Figure 4: Example trajectories oftwo particles. with two relationchanges. The trajectories start fromthe end with lighter color and grad-ually become darker.
Figure 5: Learning curve of dyari trained with teacher forcing (blue), auto-regressive (yellow), andhybrid (green) in decoder. Hybrid model is first trained with teacher forcing in the beginning 30 timesteps and then auto-regressively in the later 10 time steps. We report the relational inference accuracyon the validation data for different dynamic periods.
Figure 6: Visualization of the inferred relations (dashed links) in the basketball players trajectoriesover time by dyari with an inference period of 8. The blue dashed links in the top are the inferredinteractions from the same team (coordination) and red dashed links in the bottom are from differentteams (competition). Different columns represent different time steps.
Figure 7: Pytorch code snippet of the Residual Block used in dyari encoder.
Figure 8: Visualization of the basketball players trajectories with inference period = 8. The top rowvisualizes the inferred interactions from the same team (coordination) and the bottom row visualizesthe inferred interactions from different teams (competition). Different columns represent differenttime steps.
