Figure 1: Overview of Sim2SG. We first map the labeled synthetic and unlabeled real data to ashared representation Z using encoder φ. Then we train scene graph prediction network h on Zusing synthetic data. We align label discrepancies (content gap) between the two domains usingpseudo statistics based self-learning. We further bridge the domain gap by aligning features in therepresentation space Z (appearance gap) and output space (content gap) using Gradient ReversalLayer (GRL) and domain discriminator (Ganin et al., 2017). Blue, green and red arrows indicate theflow of synthetic data, real data and back propagation, respectively.
Figure 2: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for CLEVR (first row), Dining Sim(second row) and Drive-Sim environments (last three rows). First column shows that the source onlybaseline fails to either detect objects or have high number of false positives (mislabels) leading topoor scene graph. Our method detects objects better, has way fewer false positives and ultimatelygenerates more accurate scene graphs as shown in second and third column respectively. Objects arecolor coded. For better visibility, we only show partial scene graph for Drive-Sim.
Figure 3: Synthetic data in Drive-Sim environment changing through the training using Labelalignment c,label . From left to right: synthetic data at initialization (different number, placementof objects w.r.t KITTI), after first epoch (alignment of number and placement of objects, but withnoise), after third epoch (better alignment of number and placement of objects w.r.t KITTI) andcorresponding KITTI samples)briefly in Section 2.2.2 and further show an ablation (next paragraph) that Sim2SG also suffers fromthe same issue. We believe that our label alignment c,label can be used in conjunction with otherdomain adaptation methods. The reason we improve over self-learning based on pseudo labels is alsodiscussed in Section 2.2.1. The last three rows of Table 3 show that most improvements come fromlabel alignment c,label and appearance alignment a and the combination of c,label, a and c,predachieves the best relationship triplet recall. We notice that the AP of the pedestrian category doesnot improve with a and c,pred. The reason might be that pedestrians are under-represented, smalland hard to detect class in KITTI. Sim2SG can align the label distribution but cannot address theclass imbalance in the target domain. The qualitative results are shown in last three rows of Figure 2.
Figure 5: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for CLEVR. First column shows thatthe baseline fails to either detect objects or have high number of false positives (mislabels) leading topoor scene graph. Our method detects objects better, has way fewer false positives and ultimatelygenerates more accurate scene graphs as shown in second and third column respectively. Objects arecolor coded.
Figure 6: Appearance alignment a reducing false positive. Top row: source + c,label, bottom row:source + c,label + a16Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021The target domain is rendered using path tracing with 20 spp (samples per pixels) followed bydenoiser. We use 4 chairs (Windsor chair), 1 table (kitchen table) and 2 laptops (MacBook). We firstplace the table with a random orientation and position on the floor. We then place the four chairs ateach side of the table, oriented towards the table centre. Two laptops are then placed randomly on thetable surface with a random rotation. The asset for each subcategory is randomly chosen from a listof subcategory specific ShapeNet (Chang et al., 2015) assets. For materials, we use a subset of 4 to 6physically based, highly detailed materials for each of the walls, floor, chair and table. Laptops usethe original asset texture.
Figure 7: Samples from source and target distributions for Dining-Sim. Row 1-2: Source and Targetdomains differ in both appearance and content. Row 3-4: Source and Target differ in content but havesame appearance. Row 5-6: Source and Target differ in appearance but have same content.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for Dining-Sim. First column shows thatthe baseline fails to either detect objects or have high number of false positives (mislabels) leading topoor scene graph. Our method detects objects better, has way fewer false positives and ultimatelygenerates more accurate scene graphs as shown in second and third column respectively. Objects arecolor coded.
Figure 9: Source reconstructions for target samples in Dining-Sim environment using Label alignmentc,label. Target samples (bottom) and corresponding Source samples (top).
Figure 10: Appearance alignment a reducing false positive. Top row: source + c,label, bottom row:source + c,label + aTable 4: Quantitative results of Sim2SG on a target domain in Dining-Sim environment.
Figure 11: Synthetic reconstructions for target KITTI samples in Drive-Sim environment using Labelalignment c,label . KITTI samples (right) and corresponding synthetic samples (left)21Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021Figure 12: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for Drive Sim. First column showsthat the source only baseline (Prakash et al., 2019) fails to either detect objects or have high numberof false positives (mislabels) leading to poor scene graph. Our method detects objects better, has wayfewer false positives as shown in second column. Objects are color coded.
Figure 12: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for Drive Sim. First column showsthat the source only baseline (Prakash et al., 2019) fails to either detect objects or have high numberof false positives (mislabels) leading to poor scene graph. Our method detects objects better, has wayfewer false positives as shown in second column. Objects are color coded.
Figure 13: Samples from source and target distributions of Drive-Sim environment including realimages from KITTIFigure 14: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for Drive Sim. Sim2SG generatesaccurate scene graphs.
Figure 14: Qualitative results of Sim2SG on the target domain for Drive Sim. Sim2SG generatesaccurate scene graphs.
