Figure 1: Relationship between density and error when pruning CIFAR-10 ResNets; W varies, l = 20,n = N (left). Low-error plateau, power-law region, and high-error plateau for CIFAR-10 ResNetl = 20, w = 1, n = N (center). Visualizing Equation 1 and the roles of free parameters (right).
Figure 2:	Estimated (blue dots) and actual error (solid lines) when pruning CIFAR-10 ResNets; wvaries, l = 20, n = N (left). Estimated versus actual error for the same networks (center). Estimatedversus actual error for all CIFAR-10 ResNet configurations (right).
Figure 3:	Projections of (d, l, w, n) onto two-dimensional planes for the CIFAR-10 ResNets, showingcontours of constant error. For low enough densities, the contours have linear slopes on the logarithmicaxes—depicted by a reference black-dotted line. The density/depth plane (left). The density/widthplane (right).
Figure 4: Relationship between m* and error when pruning CIFAR-10 ResNets and varying W (left,l = 20, n = N), l (center, w = 1, n = N), n (right, l = 20, w = 1). γ, ↑, and p0 are annotated.
Figure 5: Estimated versus mean actual error for all configurations (d, w, n) for ImageNet (left)and (d, w, l, n) for CIFAR-10 (center). The variation in error when running the same experiment onCIFAR-10 three times with different random seeds (right).
Figure 6: The effect of the number of points used to fit our scaling law (on the CIFAR-10 ResNetspruned with IMP) on μ and σ. Left: experiment 1 from Section 5 (random points w, l, d, n). Right:experiment 2 from Section 5 (random configurations w, l, n and all densities).
Figure 7: Error of the CIFAR-10 ResNets as width varies (left); actual error (black), error of ourscaling law (blue), and error of the scaling law adapted from Rosenfeld et al. (2020) (red). Estimatederror from our scaling law as width varies for the CIFAR-10 ResNets (center); in dotted black is theminimal number of parameters for each error k. Same as center but using actual error (right).
Figure 8: Relationship between density and error when pruning CIFAR-10 ResNets and varying w(left, l = 20, n = N), l (center, w = 1, n = N), n (right, l = 20, w = 1)Figure 9: Relationship between density and error when pruning Imagenet ResNet-50 and varying w(left, n = N), and n (right, w = 1)15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021D	Partial (Projections) Fit Results for Section 4In Section 4, we fit the error jointly as a function of all dimensions showing that Equation 2 providesa good approximation to the error in practice. In this appendix, we consider important sub-cases, suchas the case when one wishes to scale only one degree of freedom while pruning. This serves botha practical scenario, but also allows for a qualitative visualization of the fit (and typical sources oferror), which is otherwise difficult to perform over all dimensions jointly. From a practical standpoint,in this case one need not estimate the parameters associated with the fixed degree of freedom.
Figure 9: Relationship between density and error when pruning Imagenet ResNet-50 and varying w(left, n = N), and n (right, w = 1)15Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2021D	Partial (Projections) Fit Results for Section 4In Section 4, we fit the error jointly as a function of all dimensions showing that Equation 2 providesa good approximation to the error in practice. In this appendix, we consider important sub-cases, suchas the case when one wishes to scale only one degree of freedom while pruning. This serves botha practical scenario, but also allows for a qualitative visualization of the fit (and typical sources oferror), which is otherwise difficult to perform over all dimensions jointly. From a practical standpoint,in this case one need not estimate the parameters associated with the fixed degree of freedom.
Figure 10: Top row: CIFAR-10. Bottom row: ImageNet. Left: varying width. Center: varying datasetsize. Right: varying depth. Lines are the actual error and dots are the estimated error.
Figure 11: Fit for VGG-16 on CIFAR-10 with IMP pruning.
Figure 12: Fit for ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 with SynFlow pruning.
Figure 13: Fit for VGG-16 on CIFAR-10 with SynFlow pruning.
Figure 14: Extrapolation results from four pruned networks on CIFAR10 W = 1, 1; l = 14, 20 to alllarger networks (n = 1). Fit results are in blue, extrapolation in red, actual in black. Error versusnumber of non-zero parameters (left). Estimated versus actual errors (right).
Figure 15: (Left) Error versus density for different widths. In blue is the fit eq. 2 follows closely theactual error (black) while in red is the fit for the adapted from Rosenfeld et al. (2020) which deviatesnoticeably in comparison. (Right) error of non-pruned networks versus width for different data, fitshown (solid red) for the non-pruning scaling from Rosenfeld et al. (2020).
