Figure 1: (Best viewed in color) Left: traditional class-aware method aligns the statistics (mo-ment estimations) of the distribution but cannot align the ”shape” of distribution. Middle: mirrorpairs is the same instance in the ideally aligned common space by distribution transformation map(push-forward operator), where (a, a), (b, b) are mirror pairs since they have the same correspondinginstances a* ,b in the aligned space and the remaining samples do not have mirrors in the oppositedomain sample sets. Right: our method will pull the (virtual) mirror instances together, where thevirtual mirror instances are estimated using manifold properties of the learned feature space. Detailscan be found in Section 3.2.
Figure 2: Illustrations of the virtual mirrors: the mirrorsets Xs and Xt are calculated by Eq.(5) and virtualmirrors are calculated by Eq.(6). We show the casewhen we set k = 3, i.e. using the top-3 nearest samplesto construct the virtual mirrors.
Figure 3: Overall structure of the model: the mirror selectors are applied after the averaging poolingof the backbone and the following FC layer; cluster algorithm is also applied on those representationslayers to calculate the centers of both source and target domains.
Figure 4: Visualization of mirror sets in Office-Home. The source domain is Product(Pr) and targetdomain is Art(Ar). In each class, the first row is the “top-3” mirror set using embeddings trainedwithout mirror loss and the second row is obtained by the proposed method.
Figure 5: Visualization of mirror sets in Office-31. The source domain is “webcame” and targetdomain is “amazon”. In each class, the first row is the top-3 mirror set using embeddings trainedwithout mirror loss and the second row is obtained by the proposed method.
Figure 6: The t-SNE visualization of feature embeddings for 2 tasks of Office-Home. The solidpoints denote source data and circles denote target data. Different classes are distinguished by color.
Figure 7: The t-SNE visualization of feature embeddings for 2 tasks of Office-31. The solid pointsdenote source data and circles denote target data. Different classes are distinguished by color.
