Figure 1: KD with training dataFigure 2: KD with augmentationFigure 3: KD+accuracies as or higher accuracies than those of the teachers. In contrast, we expect ISTs to achievelower accuracies than those of the teachers. Table 2 shows the simulation results. As expected, allthe CSTs outperform the teachers in the simulation experiments (i.e., Simulation KD). This is dueto the following facts: first, by using the simulated distillation dataset, the distillation objective in(4) makes the CSTs fully capture the knowledge of the teachers within the data distribution; second,the cross-entropy objective in (4) enables the CSTs to learn their own knowledge. Consequently,CSTs contain both the teacher knowledge and the knowledge learned on their own, which results inbetter performances than those of the teachers. SN2 and SN3 still underperform the teachers in thesimulation experiments due to their limited capacities. These results empirically prove Corollary 4.1.
Figure 2: KD with augmentationFigure 3: KD+accuracies as or higher accuracies than those of the teachers. In contrast, we expect ISTs to achievelower accuracies than those of the teachers. Table 2 shows the simulation results. As expected, allthe CSTs outperform the teachers in the simulation experiments (i.e., Simulation KD). This is dueto the following facts: first, by using the simulated distillation dataset, the distillation objective in(4) makes the CSTs fully capture the knowledge of the teachers within the data distribution; second,the cross-entropy objective in (4) enables the CSTs to learn their own knowledge. Consequently,CSTs contain both the teacher knowledge and the knowledge learned on their own, which results inbetter performances than those of the teachers. SN2 and SN3 still underperform the teachers in thesimulation experiments due to their limited capacities. These results empirically prove Corollary 4.1.
Figure 3: KD+accuracies as or higher accuracies than those of the teachers. In contrast, we expect ISTs to achievelower accuracies than those of the teachers. Table 2 shows the simulation results. As expected, allthe CSTs outperform the teachers in the simulation experiments (i.e., Simulation KD). This is dueto the following facts: first, by using the simulated distillation dataset, the distillation objective in(4) makes the CSTs fully capture the knowledge of the teachers within the data distribution; second,the cross-entropy objective in (4) enables the CSTs to learn their own knowledge. Consequently,CSTs contain both the teacher knowledge and the knowledge learned on their own, which results inbetter performances than those of the teachers. SN2 and SN3 still underperform the teachers in thesimulation experiments due to their limited capacities. These results empirically prove Corollary 4.1.
