Figure 1: Illustration of the output of different clustering methods for points sampled from fouroverlapping circles. (A) ABC with additive attention. (B) ABC with multiplicative attention. (C)Pairwise similarity with additive attention. Pairwise similarity with multiplicative attention per-formed similarly. (D) Out-of-the box spectral clustering. Only D was given the true number ofclusters. (Best viewed in colour.)metric learning methods, we propose a clustering problem that requires the use of properties emerg-ing from the entire input set in order to be solved. The task is to cluster a set of points that lie ona number of intersecting circles, which is a generalization of the Olympic circles problem (Anandet al., 2014). Pairwise kernel methods for clustering perform poorly on the circles problem, whereasour ABC handles it with ease, as displayed in Figure 1. We use the circles dataset for an ablationstudy in Section 6.1.
Figure 2: Comparative performance on the cir-cles problem of ABC with either additive ormultiplicative attention, as well as ablated ver-sions of the ABC architecture. The horizontalaxis shows the number of points sampled fromthe combined circles. The vertical axis showsthe Rand score adjusted so that random assign-ment gives a score of 0. The big gap in perfor-mance between pairwise and spectral clusteringon the one hand and the two versions of ABC onthe other shows the benefit that context brings.
Figure 3: Clustering performance on the test setfor our three clustering tasks on Omniglot overthe course of training. It is worth noting thattraining is visibly noisier for unknown numbersof clusters, which indicates that the off-the-shelfcluster number estimates are unstable. As themodel improves, estimating the number of clus-ters becomes more accurate, and the disadvan-tage of not knowing the true number of clustersbecomes negligible.
Figure 4: (A) Example input instance of characters all of the same class. (B) Ground-truth andpredicted similarity matrices and their difference in greyscale, where white means a value of 1 andblack a value of 0. ABC picks up on the small differences between each of the characters; this isprecisely the context that this input instance provides.
