Figure 1: Acoustic scattering of the same object at four different frequencies, assuming a plane wave travellingto the -x direction and a sound-hard boundary condition for the object/scatterer in the center. The scatteringpatterns are significantly different among frequency bands. Our learning method can compute them with highaccuracy for arbitrary objects at interactive rates, including high-genus and deforming objects.
Figure 2: Network architecture: The input of our neural network is a N X 3 point cloud (N = 1024) and theoutput of our network is the spherical harmonic coefficients as a vector of length 16 (UP to 3rd order sphericalharmonics). [R1Q6-7, R3Q3-4 : We encode the piecewise smooth local shape around every point in the pointcloud, forming a high dimensional latent space in R128. The δ- coordinates where neighbors are found inthe Euclidean space and the latent space are concatenated to represent the per-point feature. We leverage thegeometric details by several Conv2D and MLP layers and output 16 spherical harmonics coefficients Cm.]4.4	[R1Q2-5, R2: Discrete Laplacian and Permutation Invariance]In this section we provide the proof of the permutation invariant property of the RBF-weighteddiscrete Laplacian Equation (6). We only discuss the function composed of vectors in the highdimensional latent space projected by the implicit surface encoder shown on the top of Figure 2.
Figure 3: ASF prediction and groundtruth comparison: We expand the predicted spherical harmonics co-efficients onto a latitude-longitude (lat-long) map, representing the directional distribution of the scatteringfield. We randomly choose 6 point clouds from the test dataset, which have not been seen during training.
Figure 4: Pure geometric ray-tracing (left) vs hybrid wave-ray coupling (right).
Figure 5: Benchmark scenes used for audio-visual rendering in our supplemental video. These are dynamicscences where objects come in close proximity and change topologies. Our learning methods can computeaccurate scattering fields for such real-time applications.
