Figure 1: Training and inference stages of the personalized diagnosis pipeline. During training,instance representations, h, have a dual role. They are fed into a hypernetwork, gφ, to generateparameters for a linear classification layer, pω, that outputs a prediction, y. They are also encouragedto be similar to their corresponding patient cardiac prototype (PCP), v. During inference, the nearestPCP, vk, to the representation is fed into the hypernetwork, thus generating patient-specific parametersfor classification.
Figure 2: t-SNE projection of (a) representations, h ∈ R128, of instances in the training set of theChapman dataset and (b) PCPs, v ∈ R128 , learned on the training set, colour-coded according to thearrhythmia label assigned to each patient. Learned PCPs are also class-discriminative.
Figure 3: AUC on test set of Chapman dataset asa function of hypernetwork input strategies andembedding dimension, E . Bars are averagedacross five seeds and the error bars illustrateone standard deviation. The Nearest 10 inputstrategy outperforms its counterparts and is unaf-fected by changes to the embedding dimension.
Figure 4: Distribution of pairwise (left) Euclidean and (right) cosine distance from the learned PCPson the Chapman dataset to three sets of representations: those in the training set that belong to thesame patient (blue), those in the training set that belong to different patients (orange), and those in thevalidation set (purple). PCPs are patient-specific since they are closer to representations belonging tothe same patient than they are to representations belonging to different patients.
Figure 5: (Top) Distribution of all pairwise Euclidean distances between PCPs and representationsin the validation set. (Centre) Matrix illustrating average pairwise distances between a subset ofPCPs and representations of patients in the validation set. (Bottom) Visualization of the 12-lead ECGrecordings of the two patients identified as being most similar by our method. Both recordings aresimilar and correspond to the same arrhythmia, supra-ventricular tachycardia, thus lending support toPCPs as a reliable patient-similarity tool.
Figure 6: Percentage of pairs of patients, re-trieved based on their PCP-derived similarity,with a matching cardiac arrhythmia label. Basedon a desired level of precision (e.g., 0.90), wecan identify an appropriate threshold distancebetween patients (e.g., dE ≈ 6.2).
