Figure 1: The different types of OODs in a 2D spacewith three different classes. The class distributions arerepresented as Gaussians with black boundaries and thetied distribution of all training data is a Gaussian withred boundary.
Figure 2: The cluster A (black), cluster B (brown), and cluster C (red) clusters represent the OODdue to epistemic uncertainty in the tied training distribution, epistemic uncertainty in the class-conditional training distribution, and the aleatoric uncertainty in the class-conditional distribution,respectively. (Left) shows the training data of the 2 half-moon classes and the 3 OOD clusters in theinput space along with the trained classifier’s boundary and its softmax scores. (Right) shows the IDsamples and the OODs after projection to the 2D feature space (penultimate layer) of the DNN.
Figure 3: Detected OODs are shown in blue and undetected OODs are in red. Different techniquesfail to detect different types of OODs.
Figure 4: Complementary information about different types of OODs improves detection. (Top-left)15% TNR with non-conformance among the labels of the nearest neighbors. (Top-right) AddingMahalanobis distance over the tied in-distribution improves TNR to 54.09%. (Bottom-left) AddingClass-wise PCA further improves TNR to 95.91% TNR. (Bottom-right) Adding softmax score fur-ther improves TNR to 99.55%. TPR is 95% in all the cases.
Figure 5: t-SNE plot of the penultimate layer feature space of ResNet50 trained on CIFAR10. Weshow four OOD images from the SCIFAR100. OOD 1 and OOD 2 are far from the distributions ofall classes and thus represent OODs due to epistemic uncertainty. OOD 3 and OOD 4 are OODs dueto aleatoric uncertainty as they lie closer to two class distributions. Third OOD is closer to the catand frog classes of the ID and forth OOD is closer to the airplane and automobile classes of the ID.
Figure 6: OODs due to High Epistemic and Aleatoric UncertaintyA.2 Additional experimental resultsWe first present preliminary results for comparison with the OOD detection techniques based onfine-tuning of the classifiers (Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Liu et al., 2020; Tack et al., 2020; Hendryckset al., 2019b). We then present our results on various vision datasets and different architectures of thepre-trained DNN based classifiers for these datasets in comparison to the ODIN, the Mahalanobisand the SPB methods in supervised settings. Finally, we then report results from the ablation studyon OOD detection with individual attributes and compare it with our integrated approach on OODdetection.
