Figure 1: EXPIRE-SPAN. For every memory hi, we compute an EXPIRE-SPAN ei that determineshow long it should stay in memory. Here, memories h2 , h5 are already expired at time t, so thequery qt can only access {h1, h3, h4} in self-attention.
Figure 3: Corridor Task (left)- Agents must memorize the color of an object and walk through thedoor of the corresponding color at the end of a long corridor. Instruction Task (right)- A modelmust recognize instructions, memorize them, and execute when at the correct location.
Figure 4: Success on Corridor task as a function of the Memory Size (left) — We trained 10baseline models with different memory sizes, and five Expire-Span models with different randomseeds. Corridors are randomly sampled with length between [3, 200]. Performance on Instructiontask as a function of the Memory size (right) — We trained 6 baseline models with differentmemory sizes, and five Expire- S pan models with different random seeds.
Figure 5: Portal Task (left)- An agent must trial-and-error to memorize the right sequence of doors.
Figure 6: Performance on character-level PG-19. We re-port bit-per-byte on test.
Figure 7: Performance as a function ofMemory Size on enwiki8.
Figure 8: Object Collision: task is to remember Table 3: Colliding Objects Results. We reportthe location of specified colored collisions. error on the test set.
Figure 9: Expiration in Expire-Span on enwiki8. In(a), one layer of the model has two focus areas, “Egypt”and “Alexander”. In (b), we replace “Egypt” with “some-where” and the focus disappears. In (c), we insert “SpongeBobSquarePants” and the model attends to the full entity.
Figure 10: Prediction AccuracyNeeds Memory. As the memorysize is artificially decreased at in-ference to 1024, the prediction isless accurate (smaller is better).
Figure 11: Performance as a function ofMemory Size on Wikitext-103Uyer β∣∙ lβ384o f Sub-Saharan Af rlca until X5ββ A.D.--J--Medieval emρires---JThere we re many great empires in Sub-Saheran Af rlca OVer the past few millennia- TUyer 9o f Sub-Saharan Af rlca until X5ββ A.D.--J--Medieval emρires---JThere we re many great empires in Sub-Saheran Af rlca OVer the past few millennia- T-SlWUyerioExpireo f Sub-Saharan Af rlca until X5ββ A.D.--J--Medieval emρires---JThere we re many great empires in Sub-Saheran Af rlca OVer the past few millennia- TFigure 12: Per-Layer Expiration in Expire-Span on enwiki8. We visualize the expire-spans ofdifferent layers: layer 6 gives long span to spaces, layer 9 favorites special tokens like newlines andsection titles, and layer 10 pays attention to named entities.
Figure 12: Per-Layer Expiration in Expire-Span on enwiki8. We visualize the expire-spans ofdifferent layers: layer 6 gives long span to spaces, layer 9 favorites special tokens like newlines andsection titles, and layer 10 pays attention to named entities.
Figure 13: Extreme Overfitting on part of validation occurs without proper regularization.
